
Methods|Past cases of Kawasaki disease were reviewed from records of Hospital Papa Giovanni XXIII in Bergamo, Italy. Diagnostic criteria of Kawasaki disease includes: fever for more than 5 days; with non liquidy eye redness; changes of lips and mouth; swollen lymph nodes; rash; reddening of the palms and feet; and thickening and hardening of the hands and feet. They also looked at low red blood cells count, high platelet count, low albumin, high liver enzymes, high white blood cell count, white blood cells in the urine, aortic aneurysm, or other cardiac dysfunction. KDSS occurs when there is a drop in blood pressure and the body cannot get enough oxygen.The hospital records showed the blood work, EKG results, and whether the patient had come into contact with a COVID-19 positive person. The patients and their caregivers were tested by nasal swab and RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2. Some of the more recent patients were tested for IgG/IgM antibodies for COVID-19.Patients were given aspirin, intravenous immunoglobulin, and methylprednisolone. This is the typical treatment for Kawasaki disease.
Abstract|The purpose of this study is to discuss the effect of COVID-19 on the central nervous system (CNS). Databases were searched for relevant articles. Very little information is currently available. However, two studies provide documented data. The involvement of the central nervous system in COVOID-19 infections is largely unexplored and understudied. However, it is very likely that there is neurological involvement in severe patients.
1. Introduction|Coronavirus primarily targets the respiratory systems, but it can invade the central nervous system as well. The symptoms of coronavirus appear in roughly 5 days. Mild patients have symptoms of headaches, cough, fever, and fatigue. In the most severe cases, patients can have pneumonia, multiorgan failure, and severe respiratory or cardiac issues. However, coronavirus infections are associated with neurological issues as well. Seizures, encephalitis, and changes in mental status have all been reported. Once the virus enters the body via the olfactory bulb it causes inflammation and demyelination. Demyelination causes the loss of a protective fatty layer that covers neurons.
2. Methods|Databases were systematically searched for related articles. In various databases certain search words were used to acquire better results.
3. Results|Two articles were discovered that observed the involvement of COVID-19 with the central nervous system. One study found neurological conditions in 25 of patients. However, no specific tests were executed to further study the observation.
5. Conclusion|Neurological involvement has not been studied appropriately yet. Despite this it remains to be highly likely that COVID-19 could infect the nervous system and cause more severe symptoms. Further data collection is required.
Abstract|This goal of this study is to see if levels of Vitamin D affects case rate and mortality rate of COVID-19 in European countries. It was found that with higher levels of Vitamin D, the case rate and mortality rate were lower.
Background/aims|In many other respiratory tract infections, Vitamin D helps to prevent more serious complications. But COVID-19 may be different because the virus interacts with ACE2 to enter the cell. Calcitriol, which is a form of Vitamin D, increases the amount of ACE2. So, higher amounts of Vitamin D might suggest a higher risk of COVID-19 infection. Stil, the researchers think that Vitamin D will protect against COVID-19 since it has that effect in other respiratory infections.
Results|This study compared average Vitamin D levels with cases of COVID-19 and deaths caused by COVID-19 in European countries. High Vitamin D levels are associated with low case rate and low death rate.
Discussions|Vitamin D deficiency is defined by a level lower than 30nmol/L. The average values for the elderly population in Spain, Switzerland, and Italy are all under 30nmol/L. These countries have a high death rate in their elderly populations. Anyone worldwide can have a Vitamin D deficiency, but the levels naturally lower with age. Lifestyle and genetics also play a role in Vitamin D deficiency. This is why low Vitamin D trends are seen in different countries who eat different foods, have different activities, and have different genetics.To confirm that Vitamin D is protective against COVID-19, we can look at this relationship in other respiratory diseases. Though Vitamin D can increase ACE2 levels and could potentially increase the infection rate of COVID-19, Vitamin D plays a big role in the immune system. Vitamin D is necessary for some white blood cells to mature. It also plays a role in the body’s ability to detect infected cells. Finally, Vitamin D helps create some of the enzymes that are toxic and can help kill diseases.Even though SARS-CoV-2 uses ACE2 to enter the cells, studies have shown that higher levels of ACE2 actually protects against serious COVID-19 issues. In studies done on rodents, ACE2 has decreased rapidly in elderly rats compared to young and middle aged rats. ACE2 also decreased more in male rats than female rats.The data used in this study is limited because there are many other variables involved for every country like access to testing and social distancing measures. Future studies should be done to confirm that Vitamin D is protective against COVID-19.
Abstract|The transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through droplets is clear, but whether it can be transmitted through aerosols (airborne transmission) is not. This study investigated whether SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted through aerosols by measuring viral RNA in two Wuhan hospitals during the COVID-19 outbreak. The researchers found that levels of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in isolation wards and vented patient rooms was low, but higher in patients' toilet areas. SARS-CoV-2 levels were undetectable except in two areas prone to crowding. Some medical staff areas had high concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 RNA, but they decreased after strict sanitation measures were put into place. Although the infective potential of airborne SARS-CoV-2 is unclear, the researchers suggest that SARS-CoV-2 may be transmitted through aerosols. The findings suggest that room ventilation, open space, sanitation of protective wear, and disinfection of toilet areas can limit the concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in aerosols. More work is necessary to understand infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosols.
Methods|In this study, the authors sampled airborne SARS-CoV-2 at 30 sites in two hospitals and public areas in Wuhan. They quantified the number of SARS-CoV-2 in these samples using droplet digital PCR-based detection (ddPCR). The two hospitals were used exclusively for COVID-19 patient treatment. Renmin Hospital was designated for treating severe symptoms of COVID-19, while Fangcang hospital was a makeshift field hospital that treated patients with mild symptoms.There were three categories of sample locations: patient areas, coronary care units and patient ward rooms in Renmin Hospital, medical staff areas, and public areas.In these locations, three kinds of samples were collected: aerosol samples of total suspended particles; aerodynamic size-segregated aerosol samples to determine the size distribution (a curve that determines the amount of particles present in a sample according to size) of SARS-CoV-2; and aerosol deposition samples to determine the deposition rate (the rate at which particles attach to surfaces) of SARS-CoV-2.
Abstract|Scientists have found that the COVID-19 virus binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor to enter the cell. This study looks at how much ACE2 receptor is contained in the Central Nervous System (CNS) tissue. The ACE2 receptors in the CNS show if COVID-19 damages nervous tissue.
6. Conclusions and Future Directions|Though COVID-19 could cause fatal nervous tissue damage, the cause of most fatalities are from damage to the lungs, heart, or kidneys. But, understanding the role of COVID-19 in the nervous system could help improve treatment plans.
Abstract|A certain chemical family known as flavonoids activate pathways that combat oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is the phenomenon in which an imbalance in oxidants and antioxidants leads to programmed cell death. The pathways that are activated are the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) and Nrf2. It is important to note that not all flavonoids are activators of these two pathways. NDGA, a chemical similar to flavonoids, was chosen in this study due to its strong ability to activate the Nrf2 and HIF pathway as well as its bioavailability and stability. NDGA had neuroprotective effects in the animal model of Parkinson’s Disease.
Abstract|Individuals with underlying medical conditions display a worse outcome after SARS-CoV-2 infection. This study looks at several underlying medical conditions and its effect on COVID-19 infections. Studies show that obese individuals are more likely to develop infections. The fat tissue serves as aviral reservoir, which makes it harder to control the infection. infection. Diabetic individuals show a higher rate of inflammatory conditions. Hypertensive individuals are treated with drugs to reduce blood pressure. These drugs often work through ACE2 and ARB receptors and are often inhibitors of ACE2 and ARB receptors. Use of these drugs can lead to increased production of ACE2 which is what SARS-CoV-2 uses for entry into the cell.People with obesity, diabetes, or hypertension have an uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Cytokines are a small and broad class of proteins involved with cellular signaling. This can lead to what is known as the cytokine-storm phenomenon. As there are no currently approved SARS-CoV-2 antiviral therapy, efforts should be placed upon controlling the inflammatory response.
1. Introduction|Diabetes, hypertension, and other cardiovascular disease (CVD) are strongly related to higher risks of mortality and severity with COVID-19 infection. The fat cells in obese patients increased pro-inflammatory cytokines and proteins. This can generate chronic alterations in body chemistry. It is thought that SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV suppress antiviral IFN-gamma immune responses. In the late stages of infection this suppression causes a rapid increase in white blood cells. Neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages flood the body and release pro-inflammatory cytokines that can damage lung tissue. According to genome sequencing, the human SARS-CoV-2 is 89 identical to bat SARS-like-CoVVZXC21. Analysis of all coronaviruses shows that bats acted as the primary transmission route of SARS-CoV-2 to humans. SARS-CoV-2 enters the cell in a similar way to SARS-CoV. Therefore, it is suggested that both use ACE2 receptors found in the lung tissue to gain entry to the cell.
Abstract|Vaccine and therapeutic research is essential to curb the spread of SARS-CoV-2. The SARS-CoV-2 Spike (S) glycoprotein helps viruses enter cells. It is the main target of neutralizing antibodies, which bind to structures on viruses and prevent them from interacting with cells. In this study, the researchers describe multiple monoclonal antibodies, which are made by identical immune cells that are clones of a unique parent cell. These antibodies target SARS-CoV-2 and were identified from memory B cells of an individual who was infected with SARS-CoV in 2003. SARS-CoV is the virus that causes SARS, which had a major outbreak in 2003 and is related to SARS-CoV-2. One antibody found called S309 effectively neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV by engaging the S receptor-binding domain. The researchers used cryo-electron microscopy and binding assays to show that S309 recognizes an antigen that is conserved within sarbecoviruses, a family of coronaviruses that includes SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. Combining different antibodies with S309 enhanced SARS-CoV-2 neutralization, and could limit the emergence of resistant mutants. The results suggest that S309 and combinations of other antibodies with S309 could be used to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection or used after exposure to limit or treat severe COVID-19.
Abstract|Social media has rapidly grown as a medium to disperse information. The popularity of social media has led certain movements such as veganism to become more visible to the average person. This exposure helps veganism to become more accepted by the mainstream. Despite this there is a lack of research on how to properly manage a vegan diet for athletic causes. The researchers of this study reviewed applicable research papers regarding vegan diets. There is little data regarding sports nutrition specifically. Veganism can create nutritional challenges that need to be accounted for. The reviewed articles mention Sufficiency of energy, protein, vitamin B12, iron, zinc, calcium, iodine and vitamin D, and the lack of long chain fatty acids. However, these can all be managed with strategic food management and proper supplementation. The purpose of this paper is to show that an inclusive and healthy vegan diet can be created for athletes. Beta-alanine and creatine were suggested as supplements that could be of great use to vegans. However, empirical research is needed to observe the effects of these diets in athletes.
Background|Veganism is a form of vegetarianism that prohibits the consumption of any animal or animal product. The increased visibility of celebrities that abide by veganism suggests veganism could be more wide-spread accepted. However, poorly planned vegan diets can produce deficiencies in certain macronutrients (protein, n-3) and micronutrients( Vitamin B12 and D; iron, zinc, calcium, iodine). Vegan diets are even purported to have potential performance benefits due to the antioxidant(polyphenols), extra micro nutrients( vitamin C, E) and carbohydrate rich foods that aid in recovery. However, there are no studies that provide data on this subject. In order for a balanced diet basic dietary requirements must be met. In order for this to be applicable to athletes it must also be sufficient for their energy requirements. This is the aim of this research paper. The researchers wanted to provide practical recommendations for dieticians, coaches, or trainers who work with vegan athletes. Special attention will be given towards achieving proper macro/micro nutrients requirements for athletes.
Main Text|Information in this review has been gathered from a broad range of academic disciplines. In some instances, recommendations in this article have yet to be proved via empirical investigation.EnergyOmnivorous diets provide sufficient energy to most athletes. Very large athletes may have a harder time acquiring the proper caloric intake. On the other end is athletes with very low body weight who are at risk for developing low density bones as a result of their training and eating habits. Additionally high intensity training can reduce appetite along with various other factors such as hectic travel schedules.The consequence of not acquiring enough energy is far reaching. Potential loss of immune function, weight loss, and reduced muscle power and tone. Managing a proper diet can be difficult for those not a vegan diet. The harmful effects of an improper diet can be inflated by a diet that promotes early satiety. The vegan diet is rich in fibre and emphasizes raw foods. These all lead someone to early satiety when eating a meal, and can cause less calories to be ingested. This can lead to restricted macronutrient (protein) absorption. Having early satiety in meals is good for weight loss regiments, but can cause issues in athletes who require high calorie meals. However, increasing eating frequency and intake of energy dense foods such as seeds, oils, and nuts can be helpful to meet the caloric needs of the athlete. Careful monitoring of unwanted body mass fluctuations would help the athlete to better tailor their diet to their caloric needs.Macronutrients(1) Protein The general consensus is that athletes require more protein than non-athletes. Strength training athletes are recommended 1.6-1.7grams per kg of body mass per day, whereas endurance is recommended 1.2-1.4grams per kg of body mass per day. This is significantly more than the 0.8grams per kg of body mass per day recommended for non athletes. The role of protein in the human body is not obvious. The balance between Muscle Protein Breakdown (MPB) and Muscle Protein Synthesis (MPS) is known as Net Protein Balance (NPB). In order to build muscle an athlete must achieve elevated levels of MPS. This will promote recovery, adaption, and muscle building. However, in conditions where the athlete consumes less overall calories than normal they might still require elevated protein intake to preserve muscle mass. Vegan athletes however consume less protein than their omnivorous and vegetarian equivalents. Plant-based protein is often incomplete. It is missing essential amino acids, and contains significantly less Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAA) than their animal protein counterparts. The amino acid Leucine appears to be a trigger of recovery and (MPS). Evidence suggests that milk-based proteins might be superior to other protein sources at promoting MPS. This is thought to be due to the higher concentration of (BCAA). Similarly, it has been found that regular consumption of milk protein gives better muscle growth than the Soy-protein equivalent. The amino acids commonly missing from plant protein are lysine, methionine, isoleucine, threonine and tryptophan. Lysine is commonly absent from grain. However foods such as beans and legumes are rich in Lysine. Lysine can also be obtained from soy beans and lentils. BCAAs can be found in seeds, tree nuts, and chickpeas. The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND) recommend vegans/ vegetarians consume a variety of foods to meet their protein requirements. High protein foods are uncooked Pumpkin seeds, uncooked Lentils, uncooked black beans, raw almonds, tofu, oats, and Quinoa. At this time plant based protein supplements are less researched. Further research is required to understand the effects of animal protein supplementation in a vegan diet if protein acquisitions from wholefoods proves implausible.Protein DigestibilitySystems created to quantify a protein's digestibility both show that animal-derived protein scores higher than plant-based protein. Important plant-based protein sources such as rice, peas, and hemp score significantly lower than animal-derived. To compensate for the lower digestibility of plant-based protein it is advised that vegans consume a higher than recommended dose of protein. This would account for the decreased digestibility of the plant-based protein.(2) CarbohydrateVegan diets tend to be high in carbohydrates. It has been suggested that endurance athletes adopt vegan diets in order to meet their carbohydrate needs or to assist in weight management. In order to achieve more than required protein consumption it is recommended that vegans consume lentils, grains, pulses, and beans daily. The issue with this is that those foods are high in fiber and thus contribute significant bulk and increase the satiety signal. This leads to decreased intake and prolonged satiety feelings. For athletes with higher caloric needs this may prove to be ineffective. High fiber diets can also cause Gastrointestinal issues for some individuals. Therefore to meet this caloric intake it is recommended that vegan athletes consume foods such as rice, pasta, noodles, and buckwheat to meet their caloric intake.Carbohydrate Timing and SupplementationCarbohydrate doses can be scaled with respect to the intensity and duration of the athletic event. Generally, carbohydrates are vegan-friendly and their consumption is reasonable for vegan athletes. Alternatively, calcium fortified fruit juice as a liquid carbohydrate might serve two purposes. It can provide adequate carbohydrate requirements while meeting the calcium requirements simultaneously.(3) FatVegan diets are typically lower in saturated fats than omnivores. This is associated with less cardiovascular issues such as heart disease, hypertension, type II diabetes, excess cholesterol, or cancer. However, the harmful effects of fat consumption are not universally agreed upon. Lower fat consumption can have negative effects on testosterone production in males. Which might be of importance to athletes trying to maximize muscle growth. However, evidence has shown that vegan males do not have statistically significant lower levels of testosterone than omnivores. The relationship between athletic performance, hormones, and fats requires additional research. Attention should be paid to quantity and quality of consumed fats. Adequate consumption 0.5-1.5grams per kg of body mass per day is easily achievable for vegans by consumptions of oils, avacadods, nuts, and seeds.(4) ALA, EPA and DHAVegans do not eat marine life, thus they appear to consume less n-3 fatty acids. Vegans have overall lower levels of n-3 Fatty acids inside their blood. n-3 fatty acids are important for normal growth and development, cardiovascular health, immunity, and in chronic disease. n-3 fatty acids also increase nitric oxide production and improve heart function. n-3 fatty acids also contain anti-inflammatory properties, antithrombotic, antiarrhythmic, vasodilatory, antiproliferative properties. Both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids are essential and the n-3 (EPA) and n-6 (DHA) are under consumed by vegans. Thus vegans are encouraged to combine food sources of ALA with supplemental DHA from microalgae oil to optimize a vegan’s n-3 intake. Optimization of the vegan diet for n-3 intake is currently lacking at the time of this article's writing. However, recommendations of 1-2 grams per day of EPA and DHA in a 2:1 ratio have been suggested for athletes elsewhere.Micronutrients Proper micronutrient intake is crucial to all athletes. It has been recommended that special attention be given to Vitamin B12, iron, zin, calcium, iodine, and Vitamin D intakes. (1) Vitamin B12 Animal and Dairy products contain large amounts of vitamin B12 (cobalamin). Therefore vegans are at increased risk of developing B12 deficiencies. There are no plant based sources of cobalamin. The only time cobalamin would be in a plant is if it was contaminated with manure from animal waste. Cobalamin is vital to nervous system function, metabolism, homeostasis, and DNA synthesis. Short term B12 deficiencies led to changes in blood cells and neurological issues. Long term B12 deficiencies can lead to irreversible neurological damage. Roughly 50 of vegans tested are low for B12 and 21 are considered very low. Surprisingly vegans who took B12 supplements did not have blood levels statistically different than vegans who didn’t take B12 supplements. Which indicates that supplements are not enough to achieve sufficient vitamin B12 levels. Sources suitable for vegans are breakfast cereals enriched with vitamin B12 and nutritional yeast. It is estimated that only 2 of Vitamin B12 supplements will be absorbed into the body. Vegans are advised to consume up to 6 ug per day of vitamin B12.(2) IronVegans and Vegetarians consume similar levels of iron as omnivores. Most likely due to consumption of whole-grains and legumes. However, the iron found in plant matter is in the non-haem form that is less useful to the body than the haem form that is found in animal matter. Vegan diets also commonly contain dietary inhibitors such as polyphenols tannin (found in coffee, tea, and coca) and phytates (found in whole grain and legumes). These inhibitors reduce the amount of iron absorbed from the diet into the body. Research has shown that male vegans tend to have sufficient iron stores, but female vegans do not. This can lead to anemia. Due to the iron type, and the presence of polyphenol inhibitors it is advised that vegans consume up to 1.8 times the normal recommended amount for omnivores. It has been suggested that high iron intakes cause other mineral interactions and cardiovascular issues. Vegan athletes should eat wholefood iron sources, reduce consumption of inhibitors, contain foods, and incorporate soaked, sprouted and/or fermented foods to their diets. Females with large menstrual loss may consider taking additional iron supplements(3) ZincZinc is vital for various enzymatic processes involving DNA. Zinc has similar absorption issues to iron. Some studies say that vegans do not need to pay special attention to increased consumption as the body adjusts to decreased zinc intake. While others suggest consuming 50 more zinc than recommended. Common sources of zinc are beans, whole grains, nuts, and seeds. Zinc should not be consumed at the same time as other supplemental forms of folic acid, iron, calcium, copper, or magnesium. Doing so will decrease the absorption of zinc. Multivitamins might not be enough to ensure the proper amounts of nutrients are absorbed. It is recommended that vegans consume zinc rich foods such as hemp, pumpkin seeds, and other grains, nuts and beans.(4) Calcium Large amounts of Calcium are found in dairy products. Vegans have been shown to be at a higher risk of bone fracture due to decreased calcium intake. This can be especially problematic for growing children or teens. As with most nutrients the body can change the amount absorbed from a diet to better meet the body's needs. It is reported that protein rich diets do not promote calcium excretion. They actually work to increase calcium retention and bone metabolism. Calcium is necessary for blood clotting, nerve transmission, muscle stimulation, vitamin D metabolism, and maintaining bone structure. Vegan athletes should consume plant-based sources of calcium such as beans, pulses, and green vegetables to achieve 1000 mg per day. Broccoli, bok choy and kale are particularly high in calcium. Green vegetables such as spinach and arugula contain a compound that inhibits calcium absorption. Vegans athletes are also advised to eat calcium fortified foods if whole-foods are not plausible for their lifestyle.(5) Iodine Iodine is an essential element needed for physical and mental growth + development. It also plays a pivotal role in metabolism. Vegans eat either excessively large or small amounts of iodine depending on their diet choices. A study found that 80 of Slovakian vegans were iodine deficient. However, another study found that vegans consumed too much iodine from seaweed. Excessively high or low levels of iodine consumption can lead to thyroid dysfunction. Goitrogens, found in cabbage, cauliflower, and rutabaga decrease iodine utilization. Large amounts of these vegetables can cause thyroid dysfunction. However, cooking such foods tends to destroy most of the Goitrogens making this effect not likely. Iodine in seaweed has shown to be unreliable, which is why it is suggested that iodized table salt is a good solution for vegans. It can also be found in potatoes and cranberries.(6) Vitamin D Vitamin D is a fat soluble vitamin produced in the skin by contact with UV radiation. It is important for calcium absorption, bone health, and many physiological processes. It can be found in animal products and fortified foods but is mostly acquired from exposure to the sun. Dietary intake is required when sun exposure is not enough. There exist varying supplements with different degrees of absorption into the body. The optimal level of Vitamin D for athletes has yet to be researched properly.Supplements and Ergogenic Aids(1) Creatine Research shows that vegan/vegetarian diets reduce the creatine stored in muscles. Creatine is an organic acid synthesized in the body from an amino acid (arginine, glycine, and methionine). Meat, fish, and poultry all contain Creatine. Its performance enhancing effects are well studied. It increases short-term high-intensity exercise performance, muscle building, and maximum strength. Vegan athletes should consider creatine supplements to compensate for the reduced creatinine levels from their diet. Dosing creatine requires muscle saturation. Regimens for 20 grams per day for a week followed by 3-5 grams per day as maintenance. Athletes could also chose to take 3-5 grams per day for 4 weeks to achieve the same amount of muscle saturation(2) Beta Alanine Meat and poultry are the main sources for beta-alanine in the diet. Supplementation has shown to increase muscle carnosine concentrations. Carnosine is protein found in skeletal muscle and the central nervous system. It is shown to lead to improvements in high-intensity exercise performance by getting rid of free radicals. The effectiveness of Beta-alanine supplementation has been confirmed in exercises that are longer than one minute. The effects below one minute remain unclear. Further research is needed to verify and explore its application.
Conclusions|In general vegan diets tend to be lower in calories, protein, fat, vitamin B12, n-3 fats, calcium, and iodine than omnivorous diets. However, vegan diets are higher in carbohydrates, fiber, micronutrients, phytochemicals, and antioxidants. With proper selection and attention to macro/micro nutrients a vegan diet can attain a good balance. Supplementation with creatine and Beta-alanine might offer performance benefits to vegans who already have lower levels. Further research must be done to understand the performance enhancing effects of Beta-alanine and creatine. However issues with digestibility must be addressed. Increasing the amount of macro/micronutrients might be a way to combat the issues with digestibility and absorption. The shortcomings of this study is that there is no direct research of veganism in sports. To circumvent this tissue information was gathered from varied sources and compiled. Inferences were made based upon available data. Therefore, many of the recommendations in this article require authentication. The researchers want this article to act as guidance and a catalyst for future research into this topic. The main strength of this review is its complete analysis of the variables.
Abstract|Since SARS-CoV-2 is thought to have originated from bats, it is of significant importance that we observe the susceptibility of other animals as a potential transmission route. In this study the researchers investigate how susceptible ferrets and other animals that are in close contact with humans are to SARS-CoV-2. The researchers found that SARS-CoV-2 replicates poorly in dogs, pigs, chickens, and ducks. However ferrets and cats are not as resistant to infection as the other animals studied. Specifically, cats appear to be susceptible to airborne infection.
Abstract|COVID-19 is an acute respiratory tract infection. Understanding where exactly the SARS-CoV-2 virus replicates and infects within the body is important in trying to contain the virus. The paper reports, based on review of nine cases, that the SARS-CoV-2 virus can replicate in upper respiratory tract tissues. Active replication in the throat was confirmed by the presence of viral replicative RNA in throat samples. Significant amounts of virus can still be found in the sputum (phlegm) of patients even after symptoms disappear and antibodies develop.
Methods|Throat swabs of the nine patients were taken on the first day of the onset of COVID symptoms through the 28th day post onset. Viral load, or copies of SARS-CoV-2 RNA per swab, was measured after each swab. From day 1-5, the average viral load was 6.76x10^5 copies per swab, and after the fifth day, the average viral load was 3.44x10^5 copies per swab. Within 7 days of onset, infectious virus could be readily isolated (grown in culture) in swab and sputum samples, suggesting that the virus can replicate in upper respiratory tract tissues. The virus could not be isolated in any sample after 8 days of onset despite high viral loads. Despite symptoms declining for most patients after the first week, viral RNA could be detected in throat samples well into the second week, and sputum samples of most patients were positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA into the 3rd and 4th week, despite full disappearance of symptoms. Seroconversion, or the development of antibodies to the virus, occurred on average after 7 days of the onset of symptoms.
Abstract|Carotenoids are colored compounds produced by plants, fungi, and microorganisms. Pea aphids can appear in a red or green color, and the carotenoid torulene occurs only in red pea aphids. The aphid genome encodes multiple enzymes for carotenoid biosynthesis. These genes are derived from fungal genes, which have been integrated into the aphid genome and duplicated. A mutation of a certain region in the red aphid genome that encodes a single carotenoid desaturase results in a loss of forulene and red body color, meaning that aphids make their own carotenoids.
Abstract|The three proteins, Sar1p, Sec13p complex, and Sec23p complex, contribute to the synthesis of transport vesicles.The vesicles derive from the endoplasmic reticulum. Vesicle formation requires GTP. But, GMP-PNP, a nonhydrolyzable analog of GTP, can cause vesicle formation as well. But, GMP-PNP vesicles cannot target and fuse with the Golgi complex. All three proteins remain on the vesicles. Yet, GTP vesicles are functional. Sar1p dissociates from GTP vesicles, allowing for fusion. Thin section electron microscopy reveal a thick coat around the vesicles. The subunits of the novel coat are different from clathrin, another coat protein. Two proteins drive the budding cycle in similar ways. So, Barlowe et al. proposes to call these two coat structures COPI and COPII.
Abstract|Brain-machine interfaces (BMI) show promise to restore lost sensory or motor function. Similarly, they offer a potential treatment for a variety of neurological disorders. According to the researchers, BMI's have not been utilized by the populus. This is due to limitations in their physical design and ability to transmit information. This paper details Neuralinks first attempt at scalable high-bandwidth BMI. The researchers have built an array that uses small threads with at most 3072 electrodes per array across 96 threads. Each thread is inserted individually with submicron precision to avoid vasculature and enable targeting of regions in the brain. The electrode array is packaged into a small implantable device. The package is 23x18.5x2 mm3 and utilizes a single USB type C cable to provide full-bandwidth data streaming. The array is also capable of simultaneous recording and analysis of all 3072 electrodes. This system also achieved a spiking yield of up to 70 in long-term implanted electrodes. This approach to a BMI is unprecedented in its packaging density and scalability for clinical applications.
Introduction|Brain-machine interfaces show promise in helping people with a variety of clinical disorders. BMI’s with 256 electrodes have been used to allow control of a computer cursor, robotic limbs, and speech synthesizers. These demonstrate a proof of concept, but they are limited by an inability to record a large amount of neural input simultaneously. Noninvasive electrodes placed on the outside of the skull provide distorted results. They are only capable of averaging the activity of millions of neurons which makes them incredibly non-specific. Similarly, invasive electrodes placed on the skull can only measure the activity of thousands of neurons. They are also incapable of reading deeper brain activity.Microelectrodes are the standard technology for recording action potentials from neurons. No large-scale systems exist for implantation. This requires a system with high biocompatibility, safety, and longevity. Such a system would also need to be compact and low power to allow wireless operation. Current systems use rigid metals or semiconductors. Such a design permits deeper penetration into the brain, but can accelerate an immune response. It also limits its potential applications as certain portions of the brain can not be accessed due to vasculature.Here Neuralink uses an alternative approach. Flexible polymer probes have 32 electrodes per probe. Their greater flexibility and smaller size offer great biocompatibility. However, the increased flexibility creates issues with their insertion. The researchers used a robot to insert a large number of probes efficiently and independently across varying brain regions. Neuralinks system increased the amount of channels by a factor of 10. This system has three main portions: 1) ultra-fine polymer probes, 2) a neurosurgical robot, 3) and a custom high density electronic array. This system is designed for long-term implantation. It also permits full broadband streaming of the neuronal information. A proprietary neuronal spike-detection software was developed for high accuracy, low latency detection.
Threads|A custom process was devised to fabricate such delicate threads. The developed microfabrication process allows for easy and fast production of these threads. Each of the 96 threads contain 32 independent electrodes. The researchers have developed over 20 different types of threads each with three layers of insulation and two layers of conductors.
Robot|The insertion head contains six light modules each capable of illuminations with 405nm, 525nm, 650nm, or white light. The 405nm module allows the robot to visualize for alignment. The 525nm light in conjunction with stereoscopic cameras and specialized software allow for estimation of the surface of the brain surface. This complex setup allows for the robot to implant electrodes around previously identified microvasculature. This system has demonstrated an 87.1 insertion success rate over 19 surgeries. Small manual adjustments were made. This resulted in an unprecedented insertion rate of 29.6 electrodes per minute.
Electronics|The custom chip produced by Neuralink provides unparalleled signal amplification and digitization within an impressively small package. Their system rejects background noise, and digitizes the amplified signals to be streamed out of the unit for real time-processing. This system uses minimal power and takes up a fraction of the size of other systems. The researchers currently have two configurations. System A has better overall performance measures, but less channels for communication. System B has more channels but slightly worse performance. The data is then streamed to a computer for live data analysis.
Electrophysiology|System A and B were implanted into Long-Evans rats. System A was able to record 1344 of 1536 channels simultaneously. The exact channels can be changed according to what is desired. System B was able to record from all 3072 channels simultaneously. The use of the researchers custom online spike-detection software was instrumental in decreasing their systems energy usage, latency, size, and accuracy.
Discussion|The systems developed in this experiment serve two main purposes. First it is a research platform for use in rodents. Secondly it serves as a prototype of a human version used in clinical applications. The system is easily implantable and allows for rapid refinement. The next step is to modulate neuronal activity. This could potentially give the sense of touch back or allow movement of paralyzed individuals. The researchers system was designed to allow electrical stimulation through every channel, but it was not demonstrated in this paper. The researchers system offers distinct advantages over previous approaches. The size and composition of the probes is unparalleled in size and biocompatibility. Similarly, the ability to choose where the probes are placed allows greater flexibility and avoidance of vasculature. Finally, the system allows very high channel counts with a low power consumption and small packaging. In theory multiple systems could be readily implanted onto a human to interface with more neurons. Various technological improvements must be made before practical. This offers an unparalleled scalable prototype from which to move forward. This system shows the potential to offer paralyzed patients the ability to control a digital mouse or keyboard. Additionally it could feasibly be used to restore motor function.
Abstract|Minority ethnic and black individuals appear to be disproportionately affected by low vitamin D levels and COVID-19 infection. This study aims to establish if blood levels of vitamin D are associated with COVID-19 infection risk. UK biobank recruited 502,624 participants aged 37-73 years. Exposure data and blood vitamin D levels were acquired. The data was then cross referenced. Complete data was available for 348,598 UK Biobank participants. Only 449 participants had confirmed COVID-19 infection. Once all variables were accounted for the data did not show any association between blood vitamin D levels or the effect of ethnicity on infection risk. The results do not support a link between blood vitamin D concentrations and risk of COVID-19 infection. The results also fail to observe ethnic differences in infection risk as a result of blood vitamin D levels.
1. Introduction|COVID-19 has led to a pandemic of pneumonia-related illness. The researchers predict the case fatality to be 1. According to the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre roughly one third of all reported cases are non-white. There is growing evidence that COVID-19 disproportionately affects minority ethnic and black individuals. The US has seen similar patterns of infection. Therefore, it is critical that we understand the relationship between COVID-19 and ethnic minorities. Several factors could lead to this trend. UK government statistics show that black or minority ethnic individuals tend to live in more socioeconomically deprived areas of England. Similarly, these groups tend to experience higher levels of underlying medical issues.One potential reason for this could be that ethnic minorities and black individuals tend to have lower levels of vitamin D. Vitamin D is produced in the skin and is a result of exposure to UV radiation. However, the melanin in darker skin will absorb less UV radiation. This results in less vitamin D production. This study hypothesized that blood vitamin D concentrations were associated with COVID-19 risk among UK Biobank participants.
4. Results|The median blood vitamin D concentration was lower in patients who had confirmed infection than those without infection. However, after adjusting for various other factors such as SES, health, BMI, and race there was no relation between vitamin D concentration and COVID-19 infection. There was no statistically significant interaction between vitamin D and ethnicity. Median blood concentrations of vitamin D were highest in white individuals and lowest in South Asian participants There is higher risk found for males and individuals who BMI classifies them as obese.
5. Discussion|This study was consistent with others in showing a higher infection risk to black and ethnic minority groups. No association was found between blood vitamin D concentration and COVID-19 infection as adjusting for variables. Blood vitamin D concentrations were lower in black and minority ethnic individuals. Despite this, there is no evidence it causes a higher risk to COVID-19 infection. Further studies are required to determine potential biological mechanisms that may vary between ethnic and black individuals. The difference in infection risk could be social factors or cardiometabolic conditions.This study failed to find an association between blood pressure and infection risk. Similarly, there was no observed risk for smokers. However, the literature on the effects of smoking is still mixed at this current time. This study was large, but not representative of the general population. This study finds no link between blood vitamin D concentration and COVID-19 infection risk. Similarly, the results of this study suggest that vitamin D supplements are unlikely to provide assistance in prevention.
6. Conclusion|The results of this study do not provide evidence to support a role regarding blood vitamin D concentration on COVID-19 infection. Nor, does blood vitamin D concentration explain differences between ethnic groups.
Abstract|Oxidative stress can lead to Alzheimer’s disease (AD), among other disorders. Oxidative stress is when there is a buildup of highly reactive free-radicals in the body. These free-radicals can lead to cell death through apoptosis. Carnosic Acid (CA) is a chemical found in rosemary and sage that can combat oxidative stress in its active form. The active form of CA stimulates the Nrf2/Keap1 pathway. The Nrf2/Keap1 pathway produces antioxidants which can neutralize the free radicals which, in-turn, prevents cell death.Both in vivo and in vitro studies were conducted. Mouse models of AD were treated with CA transnasally twice weekly for 3 months and tested on their neuronal capacity. The in vitro studies were done on rat neurons. Both studies showed positive results in response to the CA treatment.
Main|AD is an increasingly prevalent disease among the elderly population. The loss of synapses accompanied by neuronal loss leads to cognitive decline in AD patients. This neuronal damage is caused primarily by oxidative and nitrosative stress. Oxidative stress is caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitrosative stress is caused by reactive nitrogen species (RNS).Many studies have shown the potential of the Nrf2/Keap1 pathway in combating oxidative and nitrosative stress especially in neurodegenerative diseases. This study tested the efficacy of a known Nrf2/Keap1 pathway activator in AD mouse models.Electrophilic compounds react with the Keap1 leading to the Nrf2 to be released into the cytoplasm. The Nrf2 then moves to the nucleus of the cell where it binds to the antioxidant response element (ARE) promoter region. The problem with electrophilic drugs is that they may have reverse effects. The antioxidants that are produced by the electrophilic drugs may be used to combat the electrophilic drug instead of the target reactive species. The use of pro-electrophilic drugs is a strategy to overcome the previously stated obstacle. Pro-electrophiles are activated in environments of oxidative stress. This makes pro-electrophiles innocuous in normal environments. Carnosic acid is a naturally occurring pro-electrophile.
Results|1. CA treatment ameliorates amyloid-beta-induced spine loss in cultured rat cortical neurons:For in vitro study, dendritic spines of rat embryos were treated with amyloid-beta (AB) to simulate AD. Treatment with AB showed a significant decrease in dendritic spine density when compared to the control. However, CA treatment along with the AB exposure reduced the damage to the dendritic spines.2. CA treatment rescues deficits in spatial learning in hAPP-J20 AD mice:The mice were also tested for their spatial learning. A Morris water maze was used to evaluate the mice’s spatial learning ability. The hAPP-J20 mice (the mice modeling AD) took a significantly longer time in the maze as compared to the wild type mice. On the first day of training, the hAPP-J20 mice with CA treatment took a significantly longer time than the wild type mice. However, on the third day of training, these mice took a similar amount of time as compared to the wild type mice.3. CA Treatment rescues dendritic loss in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by the number of MAP2-positive cells:The next evaluation involved four groups: wild-type control, wild-type CA, J20-control, and J20-CA. In this evaluation, the level of MAP2 signaling was tested. MAP2 signaling is correlated with dendritic loss in mice. Both the wild-type control and the wild-type CA showed robust MAP2 signaling whereas the J20-control lacked MAP2 signaling. J20-CA showed similar MAP2 signaling as both the wild-type groups. This indicates that CA treatment can rescue dendritic loss in hAPP-J20 mice.4. CA Treatment rescues synaptic loss in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by synaptophysin staining:To evaluate how CA impacts synaptic levels in hAPP-J20 mice, quantitative confocal immunohistochemistry by the synaptophysin antibody was performed. The J20-control mice showed significantly lower synaptic activity as compared to the wild-type mice. The J20-CA mice, on the other hand, showed similar synaptic activity as the wild-type mice. This shows that synaptic loss in hAPP-J20 mice can be rescued by CA treatment.5. CA Treatment decreases astrocytosis in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by the number of GFAP-positive cells:A similar approach as the previous experiment was used to test the effect of CA treatment on gliosis in hAPP-J20 mice. Gliosis is when the body creates an abnormal amount of glial cells (cells that support nerve cells). This can lead to scars developing in the brain. This experiment found that treatment with CA can prevent gliosis in the hippocampus of hAPP-J20 mice.6. CA Treatment reduces amyloid accumulation in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by AB immunohistochemistry:In vitro studies have demonstrated the efficacy of CA in the presence of AB. However, this study is the first to prove similar efficacy in vivo. Similar to the last two experiments mentioned, immunohistochemistry was performed to evaluate the AB levels in each group. Both wild-type groups showed undetectable levels of AB whereas the J20-control group showed high levels of AB. The J20-CA group showed significantly reduced levels of AB demonstrating CA’s efficacy in suppressing AB in vivo.7. Effects of CA treatment on 3xTg AD mouse brain:3xTg is another mouse model for AD. Similar experiments were performed on the 3xTg mice as the hAPP-J20 mice to generalize the results. The findings from the 3xTg mice were similar to those of the hAPP-J20 mice. Additionally, 3xTg mice have been reported to have increased levels of p-tau. CA treatment reduced the p-tau levels in 3xTg mice. The results from the hAPP-J20 mice combined with the results from the 3xTg mice demonstrates the general efficacy of CA in AD.
Discussion|There is strong potential for pro-electrophilic drugs (PEDs) like CA in neurodegeneration recovery. PEDs activate the Nrf2/Keap1 pathway without depleting antioxidants. Additionally, CA crosses the blood-brain barrier in neuroprotective concentrations making delivery of the drug much easier.This study has demonstrated the effectiveness of PEDs in in vivo models of AD, unlike any previous study. This study, with the use of immunohistochemistry, showed that CA improves histological damage in the hippocampus of two different AD mouse models.Though CA has been shown to activate numerous transcriptional pathways, there is strong evidence supporting the role of Nrf2 activation in the protection seen in this study.
Abstract|This is a phase three clinical trial in which the authors of this paper are testing the outcomes of giving the antibody, ipilimumab, to patients who had stage III melanoma tumors successfully removed. The dose of ipilimumab in this trial is 10 mg per kg of body weight. The patients examined in this study were randomly assigned to receive either ipilimumab or placebo. The survival, recurrence rates, and distant metastasis rates of these two groups were measured about 5.3 years after the start of each patient’s treatment. The authors found that there was a greater rate of survival and less distant cancer spread among the treatment group, but more adverse immune effects.
IntroductionIpilimumab,|Ipilimumab is an antibody that can strengthen immune responses against tumors. In 2011, the FDA allowed for 3 mg per kg of body weight of the antibody to be given to patients with advanced melanoma, a skin cancer. A clinical trial showed that at a dose of 10 mg per kg of body weight, the antibody was more effective in treating patients with advanced melanoma, but the antibody was also more toxic at this level. After receiving these results, the authors of this paper conducted another clinical trial. In this trial, they tested how effective ipilimumab was in treating melanoma patients who had their cancer surgically removed, but had a high chance of having it recur. They followed up with each of the patients after about 2.7 years after the start of their cancer remissions. They found that the patients who received the antibody had longer recurrence-free survival times. In this paper, the authors report the outcomes of these same patients after about 5.3 years after the start of their cancer remissions. This will provide a sense of how effective ipilimumab is in combating melanoma recurrence.
Methods|PatientsPatients that were examined in this study were all 18 and older and had melanoma that had spread to regional lymph nodes.Trial Design and RegimenPatients resided in a wide range of hospitals across 19 countries. They were separated into experimental groups based on their country and stage of melanoma. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either ipilimumab at 10 mg per kg of body weight or a placebo. Once a patient’s cancer went into remission, they would receive one dose every 3 weeks for 12 weeks, then one dose every three months until their cancer recurred.AssessmentsAll the patients in the study were tested for cancer recurrence and spread once every 3 months for three years, then once every 6 months after that. “Recurrence free survival” is the duration between the start of cancer remission and either recurrence or death.Trial OversightThis trial was approved by the EORTC protocol-review committee and several ethics committees. This trial was funded and sponsored by Bristol-Myers Squibb.Statistical AnalysisThe authors discuss here the parameters they used in the statistical analyses they performed in this study.
Results|Patients and Trial RegimenA total of 951 melanoma patients were studied in this trial. Half received ipilimumab and the other half received placebo. Of the patients who received the antibody, 53.3 stopped treatment because of an adverse event, with most of these events being drug-related. Meanwhile, only 4.6 of the placebo group stopped because of an adverse event. 28.7 of patients in the treatment group stopped treatment because of cancer recurrence compared to 59.5 of patients in the placebo group. 13.4 of the treatment group were able to receive treatment for 3 years without stopping compared to 30.2 of the placebo group. The latest follow-up for each patient was about 5.3 years after their cancers initially went into remission.Efficacy and Post Protocol TreatmentThe average rate of recurrence-free survival at five years among the treatment group was 40.8, compared to 30.3 in the placebo group. The average survival rate at five years among the treatment group was 65.4 in the treatment group compared to 54.4 in the placebo group. The average rate of survival without distant cancer spread at five years was 48.3 for the treatment group and 38.9 for the placebo group.Safety98.7 of the patients who received ipilimumab suffered an adverse event of some kind, with a little over half of these events being of higher severity. On the other hand, 91.1 of patients in the placebo group suffered an adverse event of some kind, with a little over a quarter of these events being of higher severity. Immune system-related adverse events were more frequent in the treatment group. 41.6 of patients in the treatment group suffered an immune-related adverse event of high severity compared to 2.7 in the placebo group. A total of 1.1 of patients in the treatment group died from complications that were caused by ipilimumab.
Discussion|Treating melanoma patients after remission with ipilimumab is linked to longer overall survival and reduced chance of long-distance spread if the cancer recurs. This benefit was consistent even when factoring in different geographic regions and cancer stages. However, ipilimumab has a high risk of causing other adverse health effects. This clinical trial has extended and added to the trial on ipilimumab the authors had conducted previously.
Abstract|Using data from 30-day daily dairies, the authors investigated if self-reports of childhood trauma were associated with variability in daily wellbeing and emotional reactivity to positive and negative daily events. Childhood trauma was associated with lower overall levels of wellbeing with increased variability. They found that emotional reactivity facilitated strong increases and decreases in wellbeing in those reporting childhood traumas in reaction to positive and negative events, respectively. This suggests that mastery increases sensitivity to positive and negative events. Thus, childhood trauma may lead to poorer midlife (and later) health by disturbing perception and reaction to daily events. Mastery may also have a different meaning for those with childhood trauma.
Introduction|Childhood trauma can have effects lasting into midlife or old age including lower levels of wellbeing and less emotional support. A pathway linking childhood trauma to day-to-day health in midlife of particular interest is social-emotional regulation and wellbeing. Social-emotional regulation is defined in the study as (the ability to adjust) changes in positive and negative emotions in response to daily positive and negative events. Wellbeing is defined as an individual’s level of positive or negative affect in response to a neutral day (nothing good or bad happened). Social-emotional regulation and wellbeing make up components of daily life that accumulate over the lifespan and have the potential to affect health developments.Pathways Linking Childhood Trauma to HealthThere are multiple social-emotional pathways regulating long-lasting health effects of trauma. Trauma can alter perceptions (negative appraisals of neutral events or hypersensitivity to stressors) and coping strategies of daily life events and result in less goal-directed behavior, for example. These impairments in the context of dealing with daily life can worsen over time and from poor parental relationships and early life adversity. Early life adversity can lead to increased sensitivity to both stressors and positive events, differentiating between individuals and known as “differential susceptibility”. Emotional reactivity may be able to heighten resilience in the context of positive events (i.e. completing a fulfilling project at work) as well as decrease resilience due to an increased sensitivity to adversity.Mastery as a Key Resilience Factor for Confronting Childhood TraumaMastery, or perceived control, involves a sense that one has control (agency, self-efficacy)over a situation. It has been shown to decrease emotional reactivity and to stressful events and protect wellbeing, likely from the employment of better coping strategies (i.e., turning to a support network). The authors defined mastery as a tool for those with childhood trauma to mitigate emotional reactivity from (and decrease reports of) daily negative events. Mastery could also allow for positive events to be more uplifting in those with childhood trauma. The role of mastery in childhood trauma is unclear as its protective effects could be diminished after experiencing a stressor. The production (and perception) of positive events is ultimately decided by the person as an active agent, which is amplified in the context of childhood trauma.
Method|782 participants recruited from the ASU Live Project completed self-report questionnaires about early family life, personality, and traumatic and stressful experiences. A quarter of the sample (approx. 200 people) participated in a videotaped stress-inducing experience. Another quarter of the sample completed a 30-day daily diary about positive and negative emotions and experiences. A multilevel logistic regression model was used to determine whether childhood trauma increased or decreased the likelihood of experiencing a negative or positive event over the course of a day. A multilevel linear regression model was then used to evaluate whether childhood trauma moderated emotional reactivity to daily negative and positive experiences.
Results|Higher levels of childhood trauma were associated with more reports of (and more variability of) negative and positive affect and lower levels of mastery. They also predicted stronger increases and declines in positive and negative emotions from positive and negative social experiences, respectively. Mastery, in the context of trauma, increased emotional reactivity.
Discussion|The results explored how social-emotional regulation (mastery, wellbeing, and emotional reactivity) may be a pathway linking childhood trauma to health consequences later in life. Patterns of disturbances in responding to daily events as mediated by trauma may explain this as they can compound over the course of one’s life. Moreover, mastery does not function to protect against negative daily stressors in those with childhood trauma, functioning to exacerbate emotional reactivity to events. Social relationship interventions and mastery interventions meant to organize what kinds of situations are (and not) within one’s control may be helpful for those suffering from childhood trauma. More research into the underpinnings of daily-life disturbances mediated from childhood trauma is needed.