
Abstract
The ongoing outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has spread rapidly on a global scale. Although it is clear that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is transmitted through human respiratory droplets and direct contact, the potential for aerosol transmission is poorly understood1,2,3. Here we investigated the aerodynamic nature of SARS-CoV-2 by measuring viral RNA in aerosols in different areas of two Wuhan hospitals during the outbreak of COVID-19 in February and March 2020. The concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in aerosols that was detected in isolation wards and ventilated patient rooms was very low, but it was higher in the toilet areas used by the patients. Levels of airborne SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the most public areas was undetectable, except in two areas that were prone to crowding; this increase was possibly due to individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 in the crowd. We found that some medical staff areas initially had high concentrations of viral RNA with aerosol size distributions that showed peaks in the submicrometre and/or supermicrometre regions; however, these levels were reduced to undetectable levels after implementation of rigorous sanitization procedures. Although we have not established the infectivity of the virus detected in these hospital areas, we propose that SARS-CoV-2 may have the potential to be transmitted through aerosols. Our results indicate that room ventilation, open space, sanitization of protective apparel, and proper use and disinfection of toilet areas can effectively limit the concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in aerosols. Future work should explore the infectivity of aerosolized virus.
Methods
Data reportingNo statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and the investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.Sample collectionThe sampling was conducted between 17 February and 2 March 2020 in the locations in two rounds as shown in Table 1. All aerosol samples were collected on presterilized gelatin filters (Sartorius). A total of 30 aerosol samples of total suspended particles were collected on 25-mm-diameter filters loaded into styrene filter cassettes (SKC) by sampling air at a fixed flow rate of 5.0 l min−1 using a portable pump (APEX2, Casella). A total of three size-segregated aerosol samples was collected using a miniature cascade impactor (Sioutas Impactor, SKC) that separated aerosols into five ranges (>2.5 μm, 1.0–2.5 μm, 0.50–1.0 μm and 0.25–0.50 μm on 25-mm filter substrates, and 0–0.25 μm on 37-mm filters) at a flow rate of 9.0 l min−1. A total of two aerosol deposition samples was collected using 80-mm-diameter filters packed into a holder with an effective deposition area of 43.0 cm2 and the filters were placed intact on the floor in two corners of the intensive care unit room of Renmin Hospital for 7 days. Sampling durations and operation periods are described in Supplementary Table 1. All sampling instruments were located in the centre of the respective sampling area, where the sampling inlet was at a height of 1.5 m from the floor. Considering the limited experimental conditions and the small sample size, the integrity and robustness of the experiment protocol was examined extensively in the laboratory before field sampling and these results are described in Supplementary Table 2.Analytical method and data analysisAfter the collection of aerosol samples, all samples were processed immediately in the BSL-2 laboratory of Wuhan University. The 25-, 37-mm and 80-mm filter samples were dissolved in deionized water, after which TRIzol LS reagent (Invitrogen) was added to inactivate SARS-CoV-2 viruses and extract RNA according to the manufacturer’s instructions. First-strand cDNA was synthesized using the PrimeScript RT kit (TakaRa). Optimized ddPCR was used to detect the presence of SARS-CoV-2 viruses according to a previous study10. Analysis of the ddPCR data was performed using QuantaSoft software (Bio-Rad). The concentration reported by the procedure equals the number of copies of template per microlitre of the final 1× ddPCR reaction, which was normalized to copies m−3 in all of the results; therefore, the virus or viral RNA concentration in aerosol is expressed in copies m−3 throughout. A detailed protocol is provided in the Supplementary Information.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Abstract
Background and aimsThe outbreak of the new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, causes a respiratory disease and individuals with pre-existing cardiometabolic disorders display worse prognosis through the infection course. The aim of this minireview is to present epidemiological data related to metabolic comorbidities in association with the SARS-CoV-2.MethodsThis is a narrative mini-review with Pubmed search until April 23, 2020 using the keywords COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, treatment of coronavirus and following terms: diabetes mellitus, obesity, arterial hypertension, ACE-inhibitors, cytokine storm, immune response and vitamin D.ResultsStudies indicate that obese individuals are more likely to develop infections, and that adipose tissue serves as a pathogen reservoir. In diabetic individuals higher rate of inflammatory processes is seen due to constant glucose recognition by C type lectin receptors. Hypertensive individuals, usually grouped with other conditions, are treated with drugs to reduce blood pressure mostly through ACEi and ARB, that leads to increased ACE2 expression, used by SARS-CoV-2 for human’s cell entry. Until now, the studies have shown that individuals with those conditions and affected by COVID-19 present an uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and an unbalanced immune response, leading to the cytokine storm phenomenon. Vitamin D is highlighted as a potential therapeutic target, because in addition to acting on the immune system, it plays an important role in the control of cardiometabolic diseases.ConclusionCurrently, since there is no proven and effective antiviral therapy for SARS-CoV-2, the efforts should focus on controlling inflammatory response and reduce the risks of associated complications.Keywords: Diabetes mellitus, Obesity, Hypertension arterial, Vitamin D, Immune response
Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a newly emerged coronavirus that is responsible for the current pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which has resulted in more than 3.7 million infections and 260,000 deaths as of 6 May 20201,2. Vaccine and therapeutic discovery efforts are paramount to curb the pandemic spread of this zoonotic virus. The SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) glycoprotein promotes entry into host cells and is the main target of neutralizing antibodies. Here we describe several monoclonal antibodies that target the S glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2, which we identified from memory B cells of an individual who was infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in 2003. One antibody (named S309) potently neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV pseudoviruses as well as authentic SARS-CoV-2, by engaging the receptor-binding domain of the S glycoprotein. Using cryo-electron microscopy and binding assays, we show that S309 recognizes an epitope containing a glycan that is conserved within the Sarbecovirus subgenus, without competing with receptor attachment. Antibody cocktails that include S309 in combination with other antibodies that we identified further enhanced SARS-CoV-2 neutralization, and may limit the emergence of neutralization-escape mutants. These results pave the way for using S309 and antibody cocktails containing S309 for prophylaxis in individuals at a high risk of exposure or as a post-exposure therapy to limit or treat severe disease.
Abstract
With the growth of social media as a platform to share information, veganism is becoming more visible, and could be becoming more accepted in sports and in the health and fitness industry. However, to date, there appears to be a lack of literature that discusses how to manage vegan diets for athletic purposes. This article attempted to review literature in order to provide recommendations for how to construct a vegan diet for athletes and exercisers. While little data could be found in the sports nutrition literature specifically, it was revealed elsewhere that veganism creates challenges that need to be accounted for when designing a nutritious diet. This included the sufficiency of energy and protein; the adequacy of vitamin B12, iron, zinc, calcium, iodine and vitamin D; and the lack of the long-chain n-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA in most plant-based sources. However, via the strategic management of food and appropriate supplementation, it is the contention of this article that a nutritive vegan diet can be designed to achieve the dietary needs of most athletes satisfactorily. Further, it was suggested here that creatine and β-alanine supplementation might be of particular use to vegan athletes, owing to vegetarian diets promoting lower muscle creatine and lower muscle carnosine levels in consumers. Empirical research is needed to examine the effects of vegan diets in athletic populations however, especially if this movement grows in popularity, to ensure that the health and performance of athletic vegans is optimised in accordance with developments in sports nutrition knowledge.Keywords: Vegan, Vegetarian, Plant-based, Diet
Background
Vegan diets might be becoming more visible, owing to the proliferation of social media as a means to share information, experiences and discuss opinions [1]. Promoted by some for alleged health benefits such as reduced risk of heart disease, lower LDL, blood pressure, type II diabetes and cancer [2, 3], veganism is a form of vegetarianism that prohibits the consumption of animal products [4]. Several high-profile athletes, such as former world heavyweight champion boxer David Haye and ladies tennis champion Venus Williams, have reportedly adopted vegan diets in recent times. Quite often, veganism is the product of strong ethical beliefs concerning animal welfare, and vegan activists have been subject to stigma [5], stereotyping [6] and negative attitudes [7], due in part to their vocal denigration of animal consumerism. The increased visibility of high-profile vegan competitors might suggest that veganism could be becoming more appealing for some, especially if more successful athletes adopt and publicize their vegan lifestyles.Poorly constructed vegan diets however might predispose individuals to macronutrient (protein, n-3) and micronutrient (vitamin B12 and vitamin D; iron, zinc, calcium, iodine) deficiencies [2, 3, 8, 9]. This is of particular concern if little attention is paid to accommodating for the nutrients that are excluded due to the elimination of animal products from the diet [9]. Some have alleged that a vegan diet could offer potential performance benefits due to the antioxidant (polyphenols), micronutrient (vitamin C, E) and carbohydrate-rich foods typical of plant-based diets assisting training and enhancing recovery [10, 11]. However, empirical research validating this claim is either equivocal or missing [12]. Indeed, there appears to be a lack of research into veganism in sport in general, despite interest in literature elsewhere [13]. In order to ensure that vegan diets meet both health and performance needs, basic dietary requirements have to be met and sport-specific diet-related objectives need to be achieved [9, 14]. The aim of this article is to address this point, and to provide practical recommendations for sports dieticians, coaches and trainers who might work with vegan athletes. Particular attention will be paid to the achievement of macro and micronutrient requirements for athletic and health-related purposes in this article, as well as a discussion of supplements and ergogenic aids that might be of use to performers who adopt this lifestyle choice.
Main Text
The information in this narrative has been extrapolated from a broad range of academic disciplines, such as the epidemiological and health sciences, in addition to sports nutrition literature. This is due to little information being available that discusses or investigates veganism in sport and health and fitness-related contexts. Therefore, in some instances, recommendations provided herein have yet to be fully authenticated via scientific investigation, and serve as illustrative concepts until further validation can be undertaken.EnergyFor most athletes, a well-constructed diet (omnivorous or otherwise) should provide sufficient energy in order to achieve energy balance [15]. However, data suggests that a negative energy balance is common in endurance athletes and athletes participating in weight-making and aesthetic sports (such as combat sports, gymnastics, skating and dancing, etc.) [15]. Very large athletes might also find it difficult to achieve energy balance, particularly during high-volume training phases [16, 17]. Of particular concern in sports that require low body mass, some female athletes might be at risk of developing low bone-mineral density [18]. This is likely to be exacerbated by a poorly-constructed hypocaloric diet [18]. Additionally, high intensity training can reduce appetite [19], and hectic travel schedules, poor food availability (whilst abroad or away from home) and gastrointestinal discomfort might mean that some athletes find it difficult to meet their energy requirements due to various factors [17, 20].The consequences of insufficient energy are important. Immunity might become compromised, leading to illnesses and time off from training and competition [15, 21]. Weight loss can ensue, and can lead to the loss of muscle mass, reduced strength, lower work capacity and a lack of satisfactory training adaptation [15]. Managing energy balance is thus important for all athletes, but this issue is likely to be compounded further when a habitual diet promotes early satiation and reduced appetite, such as a vegan diet [3, 4, 8–11]. Well-accepted methods of calculating energy intake include estimates such as the Cunningham or Harris-Benedict eqs. [22], Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) and/or other literature-based guidelines can all be used to determine nutrient needs and design diets [17]. The International Society of Sports Nutrition (ISSN) recommends that energy requirements should be scaled to activity level, body-mass and mode of exercise [16], to ensure that individual-specific needs are met [17]. Such recommendations are prudent in light of the preceding discussion, as well as the likelihood that athletes possess individual-specific energy and nutrient requirements which differ on the basis of sport, training and competition characteristics [15–17].Data indicates that vegans consume less energy than omnivores [8], and research suggests that vegetarian diets generally appear to be lower in protein, fat, vitamin B12, Riboflavin, vitamin D, calcium, iron and zinc when compared to an omnivorous diet [8, 14, 23, 24]. Table 1 details vegetarian diets as described in the literature, and highlights how the diets differ based on the extent of their restrictions. Some vegan diets promote the consumption of raw foods only, and data suggests that these diets might lead to poor macronutrient absorption and weight loss when consumed ad libitum [25]. Vegetarian and vegan diets can also lead to very high fibre consumption [14, 24, 25], and plant-based foods therefore tend to have low energy density and promote early satiety [26]. While these factors might be helpful for weight-loss purposes [27], these factors might lead to problems when trying to achieve a high Calorie diet. Where a high Calorie diet is needed, increasing feeding frequency [28] and increasing consumption of energy dense foods such as nuts, seeds and oils [29] might be helpful to ensure that Calorie goals are met. Monitoring and adjusting the diet on the basis of unwanted body mass fluctuations in such cases would also allow for diets to be tailored to individuals’ energy and nutrient requirements [30].
Table 1Vegetarian Diets: DefinitionsTypea
DescriptionFlexitarianb
Occasionally consumes animal flesh (meat, poultry) and fish, eggs, dairyPesco-vegetarianExcludes animal flesh but does include fishLacto-ovo vegetarianExcludes all flesh; includes diary and eggs onlyLacto vegetarianExcludes all flesh and eggs; includes dairy onlyOvo vegetarianExcludes all flesh and dairy; includes eggs onlyVeganExcludes all animal productsMacrobiotic vegetarianb
Variable dietary restrictions; includes wild meat/game and fish in some variations of the dietFruitarianIncludes fruit, nuts, seeds and a some vegetablesOpen in a separate window
aDefinitions from Phillips 2004 [14]
bReaders are advised to exercise caution in their interpretation of Flexitarian and Macrobiotic diets as vegetarian diets; owing to their selective inclusion of meat, poultry, fish and seafood, such diets might not be truly vegetarianMacronutrientsProteinThe role of protein in the athlete’s diet has garnered much attention over the years, and there has been ongoing debate about whether athletes require greater amounts of protein than non-athletic populations [31–33]. The consensus appears to be that athletes require more protein than the lay population [33, 34]. Data also indicates that protein requirements should be tailored to reflect sport-specific and training-goal requirements [35–37]. Typical recommendations therefore include 1.6–1.7 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 for strength and power athletes and 1.2–1.4 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 for endurance-sport athletes—values notably larger than the 0.8 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 recommended for most non-active adults [36, 37]. Values as high as 4.4 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 have also been investigated in the literature recently, with favourable body-composition effects noted as a results of its composition [38].The role of protein in the athlete’s diet is multifaceted. Protein serves as a substrate for exercise performance and a catalyst for exercise adaptation [32]. The balance between Muscle Protein Breakdown (MPB) and Muscle Protein Synthesis (MPS) is known as Net Protein Balance (NPB). Achieving a positive NPB via elevated MPS promotes exercise recovery, adaptation and anabolism [32, 38, 39]. During negative energy balance adaptive mechanisms preserve Fat Free Mass (FFM) under hypocaloric conditions [33, 40]. Despite this, dieting athletes and bodybuilders might still require elevated protein intakes due to the need to preserve lean mass and promote satiety [33, 39]. Concurrent resistance and endurance training might also compound the need for extra protein during a hypocaloric diet [33, 39]. Athletes involved in weight-categorised and aesthetic sports need to be cognisant of optimizing protein intakes, where the preservation of FFM and optimization of relative strength is likely to be advantageous to performance. The ISSN provides a broad protein recommendation of 1.4–2.0 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1, which is likely to be appropriate for most athletic contexts [34]. However, for athletes in need of losing body-mass, recommendations of up to 1.8–2.7 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1 have been provided in literature [33, 39], and values as high as 2.3–3.2 g ∙ kg ∙ FFM ∙ day−1 have been suggested for bodybuilders aiming to achieve competition-level leanness [39].Vegan athletes however appear to consume less protein than their omnivorous and vegetarian counterparts [11]. The optimisation of protein intakes for vegan athlete requires that attention is paid to the quantity and quality of protein consumed [41]. Plant-based protein sources are often incomplete, missing important essential amino acids, and typically contain less Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAA) than their animal-based equivalents [34, 35]. Leucine appears to be a primary trigger of MPS, and plays an important role in promoting recovery and adaptation from exercise [32, 34, 41]. Interestingly, evidence suggests that milk-based proteins might be superior to other protein sources at promoting MPS, mediated in part by the richness of its BCAA content [42, 43]. Similarly, the habitual consumption of milk as part of a diet and resistance-training programme might lead to better muscle hypertrophy when compared to a soy-protein-supplemented equivalent [44, 45]. This is might be due to milk’s superior amino acid composition [45]. Indeed, plant-based proteins often lack essential amino acids [46], and animal-based proteins therefore possess a greater biological value due to the presence of all essential amino acids in the food [46]. Common examples of the limiting amino acids in plant-based proteins include lysine, methionine, isoleucine, threonine and tryptophan. Of these, lysine appears to be to be most commonly absent, particularly from cereal grains [46]. Foods such as beans and legumes are rich sources of lysine however, and leucine can be obtained from soy beans and lentils. Other BCAAs can be found in seeds, tree nuts and chickpeas, meaning that these amino acids can be obtained by consuming a variety of protein-rich, plant-based foods [14, 46]. Indeed, the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND) have recommended that a range of plant-based proteins should be consumed by vegetarians in order to meet their protein and amino acid requirements [47]. Further, the once-popular recommendation of combining protein sources to achieve a complete essential amino acid profile in each feeding is no longer considered necessary [14]. Foods such as grains, legumes, nuts and seeds should be included in the vegan diet to ensure that all EAAs are present, and that adequate BCAA are consumed to support recovery and adaptation from training. Examples of high-protein vegan-friendly foods can be found in Table 2.
Table 2High Protein FoodsFoodProtein per 100 ga
Pumpkin seeds (dried, uncooked)30.2Lentils (red, split, uncooked)24.6Black beans (uncooked)21.6Almonds (raw)21.2Tempeh20.3Tofu (calcium set)17.3Oats (rolled)16.9Quinoa (uncooked)14.1Open in a separate window
aData from USDA food composition database SR28Plant-based protein supplements that feature in the literature and are commercially available include soy (and soy isolate), pea, rice, hemp and composite/blended protein products [45–48]. Supplemental protein might be of interest to vegan athletes, particularly if achieving sufficient protein via wholefoods is either difficult or inconvenient. Emerging data is beginning to support the efficacy of plant-based-protein powders at improving recovery from training [48] and fostering muscle hypertrophy as part of a resistance training program [45]. Recent evidence also suggests like-for-like responses when comparing supplemental plant and dairy proteins on body composition and exercise performance as part of a training programme [48], contrasting previously-reported data [45]. In comparison to dairy-based protein supplements however, plant-based supplements appear to be much less researched at this time, and further research is needed to understand the effects of individual (rice, pea, hemp, etc.) and blended products on postprandial MPS [49].Protein digestibilityThe digestibility of plant-based protein appears to be markedly less than that of animal products, which might need to be accounted for when designing a vegan diet [50]. The Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS) and Digestible Indispensable Amino Acid Score (DIAAS) are metrics that rate the quality of proteins based on their digestibility [51]. The PDCAAS has been criticised for disregarding anti-nutrient factors that affect protein absorption, and for truncating protein sources that score in excess of its 1.0 ceiling [51]. The DIAAS does neither, and is perhaps a superior system for rating protein digestibility [41, 51]. Both systems however indicate that animal-derived proteins score higher than plant-based sources [51]. Interestingly, soy protein possesses a PDCAAS of 1.0 and appears to be comparable to whey protein isolate. However, when factoring in anti-nutrient factors such as phytic acid and trypsin inhibitors, which limit the absorption of nutrients, whey protein isolate appears to be superior to soy protein when using the DIAAS (1.09 vs. 0.91) [41]. Other important plant-based protein sources such as rice, peas and hemp all score markedly lower than animal-based sources such as eggs, chicken and beef using either system [41, 51, 52]. Indeed, it has been suggested that vegetarians might need to consume more protein than meat eaters to compensate for the poorer digestibility of plant-based sources [50]. Values of up to 1.0 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 (vs. the RDA’s 0.8 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1) have been suggested for a non-athletic, vegetarian population, who might consume eggs and dairy products in addition to plant-based proteins [50]. Due to the absence of all animal proteins in the diet, it might be prudent for vegan athletes to aim for protein intakes towards the higher end of the ISSN’s protein recommendation of 1.4 to 2.0 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1, whilst in an energy-neutral or energy-positive state. In some instances, values of up to 1.8 g ∙ kg−1 to 2.7 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1 might be appropriate during weight loss phases, to compensate for the reduced digestibility and low biological value of plant-based sources [33, 39].CarbohydrateVegan diets tend to be higher in carbohydrates, fibre, fruits, vegetables, antioxidants and phytochemicals than omnivorous diets [53]. The consumption of micronutrient and phytochemical-rich foods is an important benefit of any plant-based diet [3, 9]. This might help to mitigate the effects of excess inflammation and promote recovery from training, although this has yet to be confirmed empirically [10, 12]. It has been suggested that some endurance athletes might intentionally adopt a vegan diet in order to meet their carbohydrate needs, or to assist weight management goals [10, 11, 54]. Carbohydrate requirements in sport has been the focus of literature debate for some time [55], and athletic diets generally require carbohydrate intakes of 4 to 12 g ∙ kg−1 to support high training volumes, depending on the mode of exercise, the athlete’s gender and goal of the athlete’s diet [17].Achieving an adequate carbohydrate intake via a vegan diet is relatively straightforward, and grains, legumes, beans, tubers, root vegetables and fruits can all be consumed to meet carbohydrate requirements satisfactorily. In order to achieve sufficient protein via the consumption of whole foods as recommended in this article, it is recommended that vegans consume beans, pulses, lentils and grains daily—foods that are also abundant in carbohydrate. However, recall that these foodstuffs are rich sources of fibre. Fibrous, non-digestible carbohydrates and lignin provide volume and bulk, are resistant to digestion and absorption, and promote early satiation and enhance prolonged satiety signalling [47, 56, 57]. For athletes requiring higher energy intakes, the consumption of fibre-rich foods to achieve protein and carbohydrate adequacy might prove to be difficult for some. Due to the lectins in foods such as beans, grains, nuts and potatoes [58], as well as the fermentation of resistant starch and indigestible carbohydrates (found in oats, peas, beans, fruits, and in certain vegetables and lentils), a high-fibre diet can also promote gastric distress in some cases [38, 59, 60]. In order to achieve sufficient carbohydrate for the athletes involved in high-volume training phases it might be appropriate (in some contexts) to choose some lower-fibre foods when developing high-carbohydrate meals, as long as sufficient micronutrient status (particularly B vitamins) can be ensured. Foods such as rice, pasta, noodles and buckwheat contain less fibre than oats, lentils, beans and wholegrain breads, and removing the skin from tubers and root vegetables reduces the fibre contents of these foods whilst maintaining decent carbohydrate levels.Carbohydrate timing and supplementationThe optimisation of carbohydrate consumption with respect to training and competition has been debated in the literature [61]. Conventional wisdom suggests that maintaining high muscle glycogen stores (achieved via a carbohydrate-rich diet), consuming carbohydrates before and during exercise (scaled to absolute intensity and mode of exercise), consuming multiple-transportable carbohydrates (such as a glucose-fructose mixture), and carbohydrate mouth rinsing (to delay fatigue) might enhance performance during middle-distance and endurance events [37, 62]. The effects of carbohydrate consumption before and during short-duration high-intensity sports are equivocal [36], however carbohydrate feedings 0–60 min prior to exercise have been indicated for events lasting >30 mins [37, 62]. Carbohydrate doses during activity can be scaled based on the event, where more/less carbohydrate is consumed with respect to the time and intensity of sport/exercise performance [37, 62]. In most cases, carbohydrate supplements appear to be vegan-friendly, and so their consumption is feasible for most vegan athletes. Consuming calcium-fortified fruit juices as a liquid carbohydrate might serve dual purposes however, and enable vegans to meet both carbohydrate and calcium needs whilst concomitantly offering possible ergogenic advantages if used as indicated in the literature [61].FatVegan diets are typically lower in total and saturated fat and higher in n-6 fats than omnivorous and vegetarian diets [8, 13, 63]. This trend appears to be associated with reductions in heart disease, hypertension, type II diabetes, cholesterol and cancer [63], and is a purported health benefit of veganism. However, the role of fat in the diet is an area of much discussion, and deleterious effects of fat consumption are not universally accepted [64–66]. Indeed, in some cases, high-fat diets have even been promoted [55]. Interestingly, research has indicated that low-fat dieting might negatively influence testosterone levels in males [67]. This might be of interest to athletes needing to maximise anabolism and adaptation to resistance training. However, despite reporting lower total and saturated fat intakes, evidence has also suggested that vegan males do not have statistically lower androgen levels than omnivores [68]. Relationships between fat consumption, hormones and sport performance might require additional investigation. In many instances, it appears that the health implications of a dietary fat might reflect its fatty acid composition [64, 69], meaning that attention should be paid to the quantity and quality of fat consumed. Achieving recommended values of 0.5–1.5 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1 (or 30% of daily caloric intake) is feasible for vegan athletes given adequate consumption of oils, avocados, nuts and seeds.ALA, EPA and DHADue to an absence of marine-sourced fats, vegans appear to consume fewer n-3 fatty acids and possess lower serum n-3 fatty acid levels than omnivores and other vegetarians [8, 13, 63, 70]. This might have important health and performance implications. The n-3 fatty acids are important for normal growth and development, and appear to play an important role in cardiovascular health [71], in inflammatory and chronic disease [72], and might improve exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) and immunity [73]. Of interest to athletes, n-3 fats might also increase nitric oxide production [71, 74], and improve heart-rate variability [75]. Both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids are parent fatty acids for eicosanoids (prostaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes), and n-3 fatty acids appear to possess anti-inflammatory, antithrombotic, antiarrhythmic; hypolipidemic, vasodilatory and antiproliferative properties [71, 72]. Both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids are essential, however the long chain n-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) are considered to be under-consumed in the modern western diet in general [72], and in vegans in particular [47, 70].There is ongoing debate about the quantity and/or ratio of n-3 to n-6 needed to manipulate the synthesis of pro and anti-inflammatory eicosanoids in order to impact health and performance favourably [76–78]. In the UK, an upper limit of 10% of energy from pro-inflammatory n-6 fatty acids has been recommended by the Department of Health to reduce negative effects of overconsumption [78]. Elsewhere, Sanders [79] and Philips [14] recommend that vegetarian diets limit linoleic acid consumption (an n-6 fatty acid), found in sunflower, corn and safflower oils, for similar purposes. The n-3 α-linolenic acid (ALA) is an important constituent of cellular membrane and is converted to EPA at ~8% efficiency in humans, which appears to be both age and gender-specific in magnitude [80]. Roughly 0.5% of ALA is converted to DHA, highlighting humans’ poor ability to enzymatically convert ALA to this fatty acid [81]. While humans do convert a small amount of ALA to DHA, the primary source of this in the diet is cold water fish and seafood. EPA and DHA exert many of the reported health and performance benefits of n-3 fatty acid consumption and is now a popular supplement [80]. Supplemental ALA has been shown to increase blood EPA levels [82] but does not appear to affect DHA status [83]. Microalgae oil is rich in DHA (and EPA) and might be a useful supplement for vegans and vegetarians. Microalgae-oil supplements have been shown to raise both blood EPA and DHA levels [84]. However, recommendations for vegan-friendly DHA supplements do not appear in the literature at this time [9]. Recommendations do appear for other food sources of the n-3 ALA, such as flax seeds, walnuts, and chia seeds [9, 14]. Interestingly, flax/linseeds are also rich in lignan precursors, which might offer broader health-related benefits [85], and chia is also a complete protein [86]. Combining whole-food sources of ALA as indicated in this article with supplemental DHA derived from microalgae oil might optimise a vegan’s n-3 fatty acid intake, and improve health concurrently with any health and performance-enhancing effect that augmented n-3 diets might offer athletes [76, 77]. Research detailing how to optimise n-3 consumption for vegans is missing at the time of writing; however, recommendations of 1–2 g ∙ day−1 of combined EPA and DHA at a ratio of 2:1 have been suggested for athletes elsewhere [77]. To achieve a DHA dose of 500 - 1000 mg ∙ day−1, this would equate to 1–2 g of microalgae oil, or 2–4 capsules in most commercial products.MicronutrientsAchieving micronutrient sufficiency is an important concern for all athletes. The AND have indicated that attention should be paid to achieving adequacy in vitamin B12, iron, zinc, calcium, iodine and vitamin D intakes when designing a vegan diet in particular [47]. Poorly designed diets might predispose individuals to deficiency regardless of predilection, which could have detrimental health and performance implications [2, 9, 12]. This needs to be understood by those seeking to adopt veganism, and strategies to mitigate the risks of under-consuming these nutrients need to be present if a vegan diet is to optimize health and performance. Table 3 compares the nutritional implications of several diets (omnivorous, pesco-vegetarian, vegetarian and vegan), and provides recommendations for athletes and practitioners. The following section will identify and elaborate upon concerns highlighted in the literature, based upon research indicating what micronutrients might be under-consumed in a vegan diet [2–4, 8, 14, 47, 63, 70, 87].
Table 3Diet ComparisonDiet typePossible dietary Issuesa
Possible sport-related issuesa
Recommendationsb
OmnivorousPoor ad libitum diets can lead to nutrient deficiency.Vitamin D deficiency possible (if sun exposure is poor / unlikely).Male and female athletes with low energy intake at risk of nutrient deficiencies.Calcium requirements increased during negative energy balance, amenorrhea and female athlete triad.Energy intake should be scaled to activity level.Depending on sport, 1.4–2.0 g ∙ kg−1 protein; 3–10 g ∙ kg−1 CHO; 0.5–1.5 g ∙ kg−1 fat (or, 30% energy) consumed daily.Micronutrient-rich diet sufficient to achieve DRVs; Vitamin D3 supplement might be necessary.Pesco-vegetarianSame as omnivores plus:Energyc, protein.Iron deficiency with and without anaemia a risk in female athletes.Same as omnivores, plus ensure that iron needs are met via a variety of food sources.Lacto-ovo vegetarian & Lacto-vegetarianSame as pesco-vegetarians plus:Long chain n-3 (EPA, DHA), iron, zinc, riboflavin deficiencies more likely.Same as pesco-vegetarians plus:Reduced muscle creatine and carnosine stores a possibility in males and females.Same as pesco-vegetarians plus:EPA / DHA supplement (total 1–2 g ∙ day−1; 2:1 ratio) might be needed.Increase iron (m = 14 mg & f = 33 mg ∙ day1) and zinc (16.5 mg & 12 mg ∙ day1) intakes due to reduced bioavailability of plant sources.VeganSame as vegetarians plus:Protein, fat, n-3, B12, calcium, iodine deficiencies also possible / likely in males and females.Same as vegetarians plus:Low bone-mineral density is an increased possibility in female athletes.Achieving energy balance might be a problem for larger athletes.Same as vegetarians plus:Increase protein to 1.7–2.0 g ∙ kg−1 and up to 1.8–2.7 g ∙ kg−1 during weight loss phases (obtain from range of plant-based foods).Nuts, seeds, avocados, oils to achieve 0.5–1.5 g ∙ kg−1 fat daily.EPA / DHA (microalgae); vitamin D3 (lichen) & B12 supplements might be needed; iodine in some instances too.1000 mg ∙ day−1 calcium from beans, pulses, fortified foods and vegetables.Open in a separate window
aData from various sources [8–11, 13, 14, 23–25, 47, 63, 70, 87]
bRecommendations from various sources [9–11, 16, 17, 22, 47]
cEnergy balance a potential issue in endurance, weight-making and aesthetic sports and larger athletes regardless of diet [15]Vitamin B12Due to an absence of animal and dairy products, vegans are at an increased risk of developing Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) deficiency [87]. Cobalamin is synthesised from anaerobic microorganisms, in the rumen of cattle and sheep, and humans typically consume pre-formed cobalamin from animal products, which are the main source of B12 in the diet [88]. Plant-based sources of cobalamin are unusual, unless the plant has been contaminated by manure or from animal waste [47, 88]. Cobalamin is essential for normal nervous system function, homocysteine metabolism and DNA synthesis [88]. Insufficient cobalamin can lead to morphological changes to the blood cells and the development of haematological and neurological symptoms, such as megaloblastic anaemia and neuropathy [89]. Long-term cobalamin deficiency can lead to irreversible neurological damage, and data indicates that veganism can lead to deficiency if cobalamin is not supplemented [14]. Data from the EPIC-Oxford cohort study in the UK indicated that ~50% of vegan participants were vitamin B12 deficient [90]. An additional 21% of the vegans were also classified as having very low levels. Interestingly, despite 20% of participants consuming a B12 supplement, blood-vitamin levels between those that did vs. those that did not take supplements were no different, suggesting that the supplementation practices of the cohort were inadequate to achieve B12 sufficiency. Sources of vitamin B12 suitable for a vegan diet include B12-fortified breakfast cereals and nutritional yeast, as well as dietary supplements. Supplemental vitamin B12 products typically contain cyanocobalamin, although other forms such as methylcobalamin and hydroxocobalamin are available—the latter by prescription only. The body appears to have a limited capacity to absorb vitamin B12 supplements orally [88, 89], which is limited by the presence of intrinsic factor, a glycoprotein secreted by the stomach’s parietal cells that combines with B12 prior to absorption in the distal ileum via receptor-mediated endocytosis [89]. For an ingested 500 μg oral supplement, only an approximated 10 μg might be absorbed [89]. Because of this poor bioavailability, sublingual drops, lozenges and transdermal products have been developed and marketed under the pretence that they offer better absorption, however research supporting these claims could not be found when writing this article. The requirement for vegans to supplement with vitamin B12 is important, and vegans are advised to consume fortified foods and/or take a daily supplement to ensure an adequate intake of the vitamin [9, 14]. The Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) for vitamin B12 is 2.4 μg ∙ day−1 for adults of both sexes [91], and vegans have been advised to consume up to 6 μg ∙ day− 1 of supplemental B12 by some authors [10]. Where adequate B12 status cannot be achieved via oral supplementation and fortified food products alone, vegans might need to have serum levels monitored by a medical practitioner if deficiency is suspected [87]; subcutaneous or intramuscular injections might even be indicated in some contexts [87]; monitoring B12 status carefully might be necessary for some vegan athletes.IronThe iron status of vegetarians and vegans has received attention in the literature [92–94], and it appears that owing to a diet rich in whole-grains and legumes, both vegetarians and vegans consume similar amounts of iron as omnivores [9, 63]. However, issues with the bioavailability of plant-based iron might mean that vegans need to pay attention to ensuring that sufficiency is prioritized [92, 93]. The main source of iron in the vegan diet is found in the non-haem form, which is less bioavailable than the haem iron found in animal products [93]. Vegan diets also commonly contain dietary inhibitors such as the polyphenols tannin (found in coffee, tea, and cocoa) and phytates (found in whole grains and legumes), which reduce the amount of iron absorbed from the diet. Research into the iron status of vegans has found that female vegans appear to have lower iron stores than omnivores, and are more prone to iron-deficiency anaemia [63, 94, 95]. Male vegans appear to have a similar iron status as non-vegans and are less impacted by iron status [63]. Iron-deficiency anaemia is caused by insufficient consumption of iron (or insufficient absorption of iron) and is a decrease in red blood cells (RBCs) or haemoglobin, leading to symptoms such as tiredness and fatigue; weakness, shortness of breath and reduced exercise tolerance [95]. Iron deficiency without anaemia has also been shown to reduce endurance capacity, increase energy expenditure and impair adaptation to endurance exercise in females experiencing tissue depletion [96]. Supplementation has been shown to correct such problems and might be warranted if adequacy cannot be achieved via the diet (97). Indeed, achieving an iron-sufficient diet appears to be rudimentary for all female athletes [95–97].Interestingly, however, it has been suggested that the body can regulate iron absorption based upon blood concentrations of the mineral [14]. Low iron status can lead to intestinal adaptations that increase absorption and reduce secretion in order to maintain equilibrium [14]—an effect that appears to be present with other important micronutrients discussed in this article [3, 97]. It appears that humans can adapt to a wide range of iron statuses and intakes, and vegetarians and vegans generally do not appear to suffer adverse health effects because of reduced iron absorption [98]. Hunt [93], however, recommends that iron intakes for vegetarians be increased by 80%, so that adult males and females achieve a recommended intake of 14 mg ∙ day−1 and 33 mg ∙ day−1 (vs. the Recommended Daily Allowance’s 8 mg ∙ day−1 and 18 mg ∙ day−1), due to the aforementioned bioavailability issues. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) concur, and suggest that iron requirements for vegetarians are 1.8 times greater than omnivores [92]. Elevated intakes of iron for vegetarians and vegans have been refuted however on the basis that high iron intakes might increase susceptibility to heart disease and cancer [99], and that supplemental iron might affect the bioavailability of other minerals and copper [14]. Indeed, it has also been suggested that such recommendations have exaggerated requirements by basing recommendations off of acute feeding studies, where the effects of iron inhibitors and enhancers might have been artificially pronounced [3, 92, 100]. Non-haem iron absorption can be enhanced (as well as inhibited), and consuming non-haem iron-rich foods in conjunction with vitamin C appears to increase absorption [9, 92]. Vegan athletes should therefore look to achieve iron sufficiency by choosing wholefood iron sources, reducing their consumption of inhibitor-containing foodstuffs such as tea, coffee and cocoa (when eating iron-rich meals), consume vitamin C containing foods concurrently to enhance absorption, and incorporate soaked, sprouted and/or fermented foods in their diets, if palatable. In cases of where individuals might be prone to iron deficiency, i.e. females with large menstrual blood losses, monitoring iron status and considering supplementation might be necessary. A list of food sources for iron and other nutrients discussed in this article can be found in Table 4.
Table 4Vegan-Friendly Food SourcesNutrientVegan-friendly sourcesProteinPulses, grains, legumes, tofu, quinoa, nuts, seeds, vegetablesALAFlax seeds, walnuts, chia seeds, hemp seedsEPAa
Seaweed, algaeDHAMicroalgae oil, seaweedVitamin B12Supplements, fortified foods, plant milks, nutritional yeast (fortified), fermented soyb, mushroomsb
IronLegumes, grains, nuts, seeds, fortified foods, green vegetablesZincBeans, nuts, seeds, oats, wheat germ, nutritional yeastCalciumTofu (calcium set), fortified plant milks and juice, kale, broccoli, sprouts, cauliflower, bok choiIodineSeaweed, cranberries, potatoes, prunes, navy beans, iodized saltVitamin DLichen-derived D3 supplementsOpen in a separate window
aEPA can also be enzymatically converted from ALA and retroconverted from DHA [83, 84]
bMight not be a reliable source of this nutrientZincZinc is a constituent of enzymes involved in metabolic processes that relate to DNA stabilisation and gene expression, and is important in cell growth, repair and protein metabolism [92]. Similar to iron, zinc is widely available in plant-based foods but is also not readily absorbed [93]. Similarly as well, the body appears to adapt to lower intakes of zinc by reducing losses and increasing absorption in order to maintain equilibrium [3, 97]. It has been suggested therefore that vegetarians do not need to pay special attention to consuming this mineral [3]. However, the IOM have suggested that vegetarians might need to consume up to 50% more zinc than non-vegetarians owing to its poor bioavailability [92]. Indeed, common vegan sources of zinc include beans, whole grains, nuts and seeds (Table ​(Table4)—foods4)—foods that also contain phytate [93]. However, processing foods can reduce phytate too. Leavening bread activates phytase, breaking down phytic acid, and soaking, fermenting and sprouting nuts and grains can all reduce phytate levels and increase nutrient bioavailability [101]. Based on the IOM’s suggestion, it has been recommended that male vegans consume up to 16.5 mg ∙ day−1 of zinc (vs. the RDA of 11 mg ∙ day−1) and females up to 12 mg ∙ day−1 (vs. 8 mg ∙ day−1) [10]. Zinc bioavailability appears to be enhanced by dietary protein and inhibited by supplemental folic acid, iron, calcium, copper and magnesium, but might not be affected by the whole-food sources of these nutrients [101]. In order to achieve the above recommendations, vegans should look to consume zinc-rich foods such as hemp and pumpkin seeds, and other grains, nuts and beans (Table ​(Table4),4), and look to adopt processing methods that improve mineral absorption, such as soaking and fermenting, as suggested earlier. If this is not achievable, a supplement should be considered. Owing to issues concerning bioavailability, zinc supplements should not be consumed at the same time as supplemental forms of the aforementioned minerals. Multivitamin/mineral formulas might be inadequate if to ensure nutrient adequacy in this instance.CalciumCalcium is abundant in a wide range of foodstuffs, most notably dairy products. Data indicates that vegans consume less calcium than omnivores and other vegetarians [63]. Indeed, Canadian vegans have been shown to consume only 578 mg ∙ day−1 compared with the 950 mg ∙ day−1 and 875 mg ∙ day−1 of omnivores and ovo-lacto vegetarians [102]. Vegans have been shown to be at a higher risk of fracture due to lower calcium intakes [103]. Low intakes of calcium are particularly problematic for children and teenagers, where higher calcium requirements are required for bone development [78, 104]. As with other minerals, the body appears to be able to regulate calcium status during periods of low consumption. When habitual calcium intakes are low, and when sufficient vitamin D is present, an increased proportion of calcium is absorbed from food [104]. It has been suggested that lower protein intakes typical of a vegan diet might contribute to greater calcium retention due to high-protein diets promoting calcium excretion in the urine [104, 105]. However, evidence demonstrates that protein-rich diets have no effect on calcium retention [105], and in some instances work synergistically with calcium to improve calcium retention and bone metabolism [34, 105]. It is widely recommended that adequate calcium is necessary for blood clotting, nerve transmission, muscle stimulation, vitamin D metabolism and maintaining bone structure [106]. Indeed, the importance of calcium for the vegan athlete reflects its role in the maintenance of skeletal health during weight-bearing exercise, and increased calcium losses experienced during heavy perspiration [107]. Calcium requirements might also be exacerbated during phases of calorie restriction, amenorrhea and in some instances of the female athlete triad [107]. However, it is also proposed that the RDA for calcium (1000 mg ∙ day−1) is sufficient to meet the requirements of athletic populations in most contexts, and so despite the aforesaid factors, it has been suggested that athletes do not have an elevated requirement for the nutrient in general [107].In order to meet the above requirement, vegan athletes should consume plant-based sources of calcium such as beans, pulses and green vegetables in sufficient quantities to achieve the 1000 mg ∙ day−1 recommendation [106]. Broccoli, bok choy and kale are particularly high in calcium; green vegetables such as spinach and arugula contain oxalate however, which impedes calcium absorption [104]. Vegans therefore should choose plant sources that contain low oxalate levels when designing calcium-rich meals. Calcium-fortified foods are also widely available, and examples such as calcium-fortified soy, nut milks and fruit juices are all vegan-friendly and provide readily absorbable forms of the nutrient (Table ​(Table4).4). Vegans can also consume calcium-set tofu, which is also rich in protein, to help achieve their requirements if palatable. If a vegan diet cannot achieve sufficient calcium levels, then a supplement might also be required [14].IodineIodine is an essential trace element needed for physical and mental growth and development, and plays in an important role in thyroid function and metabolism [92]. Excessively high or low intakes of iodine can lead to thyroid dysfunction, and vegans have been shown to consume both excessively high and low intakes depending on their dietary choices [108, 109]. To highlight, a study by Krajcovicova-Kudlackova and colleagues [110] found that 80% of Slovakian vegans were iodine deficient. Lightowler and Davies [109] however found that some vegans consumed excess iodine (from seaweed) in their study. Common iodine sources include fish and dairy products, and the DRI for Iodine has been set at 150 μg ∙ day−1 for adults [92]. Iodine content in foods vary according to the soil-iodine content (when growing produce), the farming methods used during production, the season it is grown in, and the species of fish (if non vegan) [111]. Goitrogens, found in cruciferous vegetables such as cabbage, cauliflower and rutabaga decrease iodine utilisation and might affect adversely thyroid function if consumed in large amounts [111]. However, cooking such foods appears to destroy many of the goitrogenic compounds present, making this effect unlikely. Raw-food vegans should look to limit the consumption of raw, goitrogenic foods where possible.Seaweed and sea vegetables are a concentrated source of iodine that are vegan-friendly. Excessively high iodine intakes have been reported in vegans who regularly consume seaweed however [109, 112], and in some cases have led to elevated Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) levels [113, 114]. Elevated TSH might reflect iodine-induced hyperthyroidism or iodine-induced hypothyroidism [114]. However, iodine intakes above 150 μg ∙ day−1 appear to be well tolerated, unless clinical susceptibilities to thyroid issues are present [115]. Iodine concentrations in seaweed can vary markedly [115], and the British Dietetic Association suggests that seaweed might not be a reliable iodine source [116]. Iodized table salt has however been indicated for vegans looking to achieve sufficient intakes [14], and iodine can be also found in foods such as potatoes, breads (in some countries) and cranberries (Table ​(Table4).4). Examples of how to achieve sufficient iodine levels (and for other nutrients discussed in this article) can be seen in Tables 5 and ​and6,6, which provide menus based on a 2500 and 3500 Calorie requirement. Where iodine sufficiency cannot be achieved through food alone, a supplement that meets the 150 μg ∙ day−1 recommendation might be advisable.

Table 5Sample 2500 Calorie menua
MealIngredientsBreakfast:
“Nutty Banana Oatmeal”
• Oats, ½ cup (uncooked)• Almond milk, fortified, unsweetened, 1 cup• Banana, 1 small (60 g)• Brazil nuts, 1nut• Flax seeds, milled, 1 tablespoon• Pumpkin seeds, 1 tablespoon• 1000 IU Vitamin D3 (lichen derived)• 2.4 μg Vitamin B12• 2 g microalgae oil supplementLunch / Pre-training:
“Asian-style Kale Salad”
• Kale, 1 cup, chopped• Carrot, 1 medium, shredded• Cucumber, ½ cup, shredded• Dried wakame, 1 g, sprinkles• Rice noodles, 57 g (uncooked weight)• Edamame beans, ½ cup• Tofu, calcium-set, ½ cup• Ginger, garlic, chili, to taste• Sesame oil, 1 tablespoonPost Training:
“Mixed berry protein smoothie”
• Pea protein isolate, 40 g• Frozen raspberries, ½ cup• Frozen strawberries, ½ cup• Frozen blueberries, ½ cup• Hemp milk, fortified, 1 cupDinner:
“Garbanzo and Sweet potato Curry”
• Garbanzos, 120 g, cooked• Seitan, 40 g• Sweet potatoes, 1 medium• Tomatoes, ½ can• Onion, 1 red, small• Garlic, 1 clove• Olive oil, 1 tbsp.• Long grain rice, 1 cup• Curry spices, to tasteTotal Energy2512 CaloriesProtein154 gCarbohydrate312 gTotal Fat75 g
n-34.4 gALA1597 mgEPA300 mgDHA529 mgFibre (g)58 gVitamin B123.4 μgIron31.4 mgZinc15.4 mgCalcium2226 mgIodine173 μgVitamin D34.5 μgOpen in a separate window
aBased on a 77 kg male gym goer; diet created using Nutritics (Nutritics Limited, Dublin, Ireland)Table 6Sample 3500 Calorie menua
MealIngredientsBreakfast:
“Tofu scramble with avocado toast”
• Tofu, ½ block / 250 g• Whole-wheat bread, toasted, 3 large slices• Avocado, ¼, diced• Navel orange, 1 medium• 2 g microalgae oil supplementLunch / pre training:
“Roast vegetable, tempeh & buckwheat salad”
• Buckwheat, raw, 1 cup• Tempeh, ¾ cup / 100 g• Zucchini, ½, roasted• Eggplant, ½, roasted• Onion, red, ½, roasted• Bell pepper, ½, roasted• Olive oil, balsamic vinegar, 1 tbsp. EachPost-training snack:
“Spiced apple cereal”
• Puffed rice, 2 cups• Apple, 1 large• Prunes, chopped, 18 g• Cinnamon, to taste• Soy milk, unsweetened, 270 ml• Rice protein, vanilla, 1.5 scoops / 35 gDinner:“Spaghetti”
• Black bean spaghetti, 75 g, raw weight• Spaghetti, dried, 88 g, raw weight• Pasta sauce, tomato, low sodium, ½ jar• Onion, red, ½• Spinach, frozen, 70 g• Garlic, basil, to taste• Olive oil, 1 tbsp.• Nutritional yeast flakes (B12 enriched), 1 tbsp.Snack:
“Chia, flax and hemp seed dessert”
• Chia seeds, flax seeds, hemp seeds, 2 tbsp. Each• Almond milk, 1 cup• Dates, chopped, × 2• Strawberries, ½ cupTotal Energy3446 CaloriesProtein193 gCarbohydrate443 gTotal Fat94 g 
n-39.8 g ALA7754 mg EPA300 mg DHA529 mgFibre (g)91 gVitamin B124.2 μgIron42 mgZinc40 mgCalcium2406 mgIodine153 μgVitamin D22.7 μgOpen in a separate window
aBased on a 94 kg male strength athlete; diet created using Nutritics (Nutritics Limited, Dublin, Ireland)Vitamin DVitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin produced in the skin, is essential for calcium absorption and bone health, and plays an important role in many physiological processes [117]. While humans synthesize vitamin D from exposure to sunlight, vitamin D can also be found in animal products and fortified foods [117]. Dietary intakes of vitamin D appear to be low in vegans who do not achieve sufficient sun exposure [118]. Cholecalciferol (D3) is an animal-derived version of vitamin D that is now widely available as a supplement [119]. Ergocalciferol [D2] is a vegan-friendly version of vitamin D but appears to be less bioavailable than cholecalciferol [119, 120]. Recently, however, vegan-friendly versions of cholecalciferol derived from lichen, a composite fungal-algae organism, have become commercially available, offering vegans a more bioavailable supplemental option. These supplements appear to be dosed similarly to animal-derived products, with dosages of 200–1000 IU per serving being common, and can be used as a like-for-like equivalent for animal-based counterparts.In the USA, the IOM recommend an RDA of 600 I.U ∙ day−1 [117] for vitamin D. In the UK the Department of Health recommend 10 μg ∙ day−1 (400 I.U) is supplemented by individuals who do not achieve adequate sun exposure [121]. Of interest to athletes, Cannell et al. [122] suggest that optimising vitamin D status might improve athletic performance, if deficiency is present. Indeed, Moran et al. [123] highlight that poor vitamin D status negatively affects muscle strength and oxygen consumption, and suggest that supplementation might protect against overuse injury via its role in calcium metabolism and skeletal muscle function. Optimising vitamin D status is perhaps an important consideration for all athletes, regardless of dietary choice [124].Effective vitamin D dosing might necessitate that supplementation is optimized via bespoke treatment strategies [125], based on individuals’ existing blood levels. In order to determine vitamin D status, plasma 25OHD levels can be sampled. Values <20 ng ∙ ml−1 are considered to be clinically deficient [126]. Optimal values might fall between 40 and 70 ng ∙ ml−1 [126, 127]. Recommendations for supplementation provided by Dalqhuist and colleagues [128] suggest that athletes should aim to achieve plasma 25OHD levels in the range of 30–40 ng ∙ ml−1. Dalqhuist and team [128] also suggest that supplemental doses of up to 4–5000 IU ∙ day−1 coupled with 50–100 μg ∙ day−1 of vitamin K1 and K2 could improve exercise recovery, allowing athletes to train more frequently. Data concerning performance-enhancing effects and toxicity at higher dosages of vitamin D have yet to be demonstrated, however a tolerable upper intake of 4000 IU ∙ day−1 has been established by the IOM [106]. Blood 25OHD values >150 ng ∙ ml−1 (plus hypercalcemia) are generally thought to signify toxicity [126]. Further research is warranted to determine optimal vitamin D doses for athletes.Supplements and ergogenic aidsCreatineResearch indicates that vegetarian and vegan diets reduce muscle creatine stores [129–131]. Creatine is a nitrogeneous, organic acid synthesized endogenously from arginine, glycine and methionine [132]. Foods such as meat, fish and poultry are rich sources of creatine but are excluded from a vegan diet. Creatine’s performance-enhancing effects have been well studied, and it appears that supplementation can improve short-term high-intensity exercise performance, muscle hypertrophy and maximal strength [132, 133]. Creatine supplementation might also lead to increased plasma volume, improved glycogen storage, improved ventilatory threshold, and reduce oxygen consumption during submaximal exercise [133]. Interestingly, data indicates that creatine supplementation might be most beneficial for athletes with low pre-existing muscle creatine stores. To highlight, Burke et al. [129] found that supplemental creatine attenuated low muscle creatine stores in vegetarians, who experienced greater improvements in FFM, maximal strength and type II muscle fibre area compared to omnivores. Creatine supplementation might therefore be an important ergogenic aid for vegan athletes to consider, and compensate for reduced muscle creatine stores experienced as a result of their lifestyle choices.Dosing creatine effectively requires the achievement of muscle creatine saturation, and regimens of 20 g ∙ day−1 for 3–7 days to load creatine followed by maintenance doses of 3–5 g ∙ day−1 are common [132]. However, a smaller dose of 3–5 g ∙ day−1 taken over a 4-week period will achieve creatine saturation over the long term similarly [134]. Other protocols, such as 1 g ∙ 30 min−1 over 20 intakes per day, have also been suggested as means to achieve maximal saturation [135]. The co-ingestion of creatine with protein and carbohydrate might increase creatine retention by way of insulin-mediated storage, but appears not to have any noticeable performance-enhancing effects beyond stand-alone ingestion [133]. For vegan athletes who decide to supplement, powder forms of synthetic creatine are vegan-friendly (capsulated products might contain bovine gelatine), and the co-ingestion of creatine with whole food and/or a protein and carbohydrate mixture might be an optimal way of achieving creatine storage.Beta alanineSimilar to muscle creatine levels, evidence also indicates that vegetarians have lower levels of muscle carnosine compared to omnivores [136, 137]. Carnosine, an intracellular proton buffer and antioxidant, is a cytoplasmic dipeptide (β-alanyl-l-histidine) found in skeletal muscle and the central nervous system, and is synthesised in situ from its rate-limiting precursor β-alanine [136]. Meat and poultry are the main sources of β-alanine in the diet, and β-alanine supplementation has been shown to increase muscle carnosine concentrations, leading to improvements in high-intensity exercise performance by way of buffering excess protons, scavenging free radicals, chelating transition metals and reducing fatigue [138, 139]. Achieving muscle carnosine saturation appears to be an important factor in effective β-alanine dosing, and research validates the efficacy of loading β-alanine in divided doses of 4–6 g ∙ day−1 for 2–4 weeks [139]. The efficacy of β-alanine supplementation has been confirmed in exercise >60 s duration, in aerobic exercise, and in attenuating muscle fatigue and improving time-trial performance in high-intensity exercise [139]. The effect of supplementation in exercise lasting <60 s is unclear however. Owing to muscle carnosine levels being lower in vegetarians than omnivores [137], it is feasible that the efficacy of β-alanine supplementation might also be augmented in vegans. Further research is necessary to validate this hypothesis however.Taurine and β-alanine share transport mechanisms, meaning that supplemental β-alanine might theoretically inhibit taurine uptake in skeletal muscle [139, 140]. Taurine is a sulphur-containing amino acid that appears to play a role in many important physiological processes in humans, including bile acid conjugation, cardiovascular function, neurotransmission and euglycemia, and is obtained from seafood, meat and dairy products [140, 141]. Vegans have been shown to consume negligible amounts of taurine [142], which is conditionally essential in some clinical contexts [141]. It has been suggested that vegans might benefit from taurine supplements owing to its absence in the vegan diet [10]. However, further support for this recommendation could not be found in the literature located for this article. If indeed supplemental β-alanine does lead to reductions in taurine in humans, then vegans might be at greater risk of experiencing taurine depletion due to its absence from the diet. However, it must be noted that β-alanine has not been shown to reduce taurine levels in humans to date, and is considered to be safe when used within the parameters of recommended dosing [139].The primary limitation of this review is the lack of research into veganism in sport. To mitigate this issue, information was gathered for this review from multiple sources, and inferences were made from the available data and via reasoned judgements. As such, many of the recommendations in this article require authentication, and so this article should serve as a catalyst for future research as well as a guidance document for athletes and practitioners. The main strength of this review is its comprehensiveness.
Conclusions
In general, vegan diets tend to be lower in Calories, protein, fat, vitamin B12, n-3 fats, calcium and iodine than omnivorous diets, whilst concurrently being higher in carbohydrates, fibre, micronutrients, phytochemicals and antioxidants. Achieving a high energy intake is difficult in some instances, owing to plant-based foods promoting satiety. Issues with the digestibility and absorption of nutrients such as protein, calcium, iron and zinc might be an issue too, meaning that athletes might need to consume higher amounts of these foods compared to omnivores and other vegetarians. However, through the strategic selection and management of food choices, and with special attention being paid to the achievement of energy, macro and micronutrient recommendations, along with appropriate supplementation, a vegan diet can achieve the needs of most athletes satisfactorily. Supplementation with creatine and β-alanine might offer augmented performance-enhancing effects in vegans, who experience low pre-existing levels of these substances, and further research is needed to investigate the performance-enhancing effects of these substances in vegan populations. For some, a vegan diet is the manifestation of important ethical beliefs, and requires diligence to sustain [5–7]. It is a central tenet of this article that similar conscientiousness needs be paid to achieving dietary sufficiency, otherwise health and performance could suffer over the long term if an individual’s nutrition is not managed appropriately.
Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome–coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes the infectious disease COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019), which was first reported in Wuhan, China, in December 2019. Despite extensive efforts to control the disease, COVID-19 has now spread to more than 100 countries and caused a global pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 is thought to have originated in bats; however, the intermediate animal sources of the virus are unknown. In this study, we investigated the susceptibility of ferrets and animals in close contact with humans to SARS-CoV-2. We found that SARS-CoV-2 replicates poorly in dogs, pigs, chickens, and ducks, but ferrets and cats are permissive to infection. Additionally, cats are susceptible to airborne transmission. Our study provides insights into the animal models for SARS-CoV-2 and animal management for COVID-19 control.
Abstract
Carotenoids are colored compounds produced by plants, fungi, and microorganisms and are required in the diet of most animals for oxidation control or light detection. Pea aphids display a red-green color polymorphism, which influences their susceptibility to natural enemies, and the carotenoid torulene occurs only in red individuals. Unexpectedly, we found that the aphid genome itself encodes multiple enzymes for carotenoid biosynthesis. Phylogenetic analyses show that these aphid genes are derived from fungal genes, which have been integrated into the genome and duplicated. Red individuals have a 30-kilobase region, encoding a single carotenoid desaturase that is absent from green individuals. A mutation causing an amino acid replacement in this desaturase results in loss of torulene and of red body color. Thus, aphids are animals that make their own carotenoids.
Abstract
Brain-machine interfaces hold promise for the restoration of sensory and motor function and the treatment of neurological disorders, but clinical brain-machine interfaces have not yet been widely adopted, in part, because modest channel counts have limited their potential. In this white paper, we describe Neuralink’s first steps toward a scalable high-bandwidth brain-machine interface system. We have built arrays of small and flexible electrode “threads,” with as many as 3072 electrodes per array distributed across 96 threads. We have also built a neurosurgical robot capable of inserting six threads (192 electrodes) per minute. Each thread can be individually inserted into the brain with micron precision for avoidance of surface vasculature and targeting specific brain regions. The electrode array is packaged into a small implantable device that contains custom chips for low-power on-board amplification and digitization: The package for 3072 channels occupies less than 23×18.5×2 mm3. A single USB-C cable provides full-bandwidth data streaming from the device, recording from all channels simultaneously. This system has achieved a spiking yield of up to 70% in chronically implanted electrodes. Neuralink’s approach to brain-machine interface has unprecedented packaging density and scalability in a clinically relevant package.Keywords: brain-machine interface, sensory function, motor function, neurology
Introduction
Brain-machine interfaces have the potential to help people with a wide range of clinical disorders. For example, researchers have demonstrated human neuroprosthetic control of computer cursors [1-3], robotic limbs [4,5], and speech synthesizers [6] by using no more than 256 electrodes. Although these successes suggest that high-fidelity information transfer between brains and machines is possible, development of brain-machine interface has been critically limited by the inability to record from large numbers of neurons. Noninvasive approaches can record the average of millions of neurons through the skull, but this signal is distorted and nonspecific [7,8]. Invasive electrodes placed on the surface of the cortex can record useful signals, but they are limited in that they average the activity of thousands of neurons and cannot record signals deep in the brain [9]. Most brain-machine interfaces have used invasive techniques, because the most precise readout of neural representations requires recording single action potentials from neurons in distributed, functionally linked ensembles [10].Microelectrodes are the gold-standard technology for recording action potentials, but there is no clinically translatable microelectrode technology for large-scale recordings [11]. This would require a system with material properties that provide high biocompatibility, safety, and longevity. Moreover, this device would also need a practical surgical approach and high-density, low-power electronics to ultimately facilitate fully implanted wireless operation.Most devices for long-term neural recording are arrays of electrodes made from rigid metals or semiconductors [12-18]. Although rigid metal arrays facilitate penetrating the brain, the size, Young modulus, and bending stiffness mismatches between stiff probes and brain tissue can drive immune responses that limit the function and longevity of these devices [19,11]. Furthermore, the fixed geometry of these arrays constrains the populations of neurons that can be accessed, especially due to the presence of vasculature.An alternative approach is to use thin, flexible multielectrode polymer probes [20,21]. The smaller size and increased flexibility of these probes should offer greater biocompatibility. However, a drawback of this approach is that thin polymer probes are not stiff enough to directly insert into the brain; their insertion must be facilitated by stiffeners [22,21], injection [23,24], or other approaches [25], all of which are quite slow [26,27]. To satisfy the functional requirements for a high-bandwidth brain-machine interface, while taking advantage of the properties of thin-film devices, we developed a robotic approach, where large numbers of fine and flexible polymer probes are efficiently and independently inserted across multiple brain regions [28].Here, we report Neuralink’s progress toward a flexible, scalable brain-machine interface that increases channel count by an order of magnitude over prior work. Our system has three main components: ultra-fine polymer probes, a neurosurgical robot, and custom high-density electronics (all of which are described below). We demonstrate the rapid implantation of 96 polymer threads, each thread with 32 electrodes, yielding a total of 3072 electrodes.We developed miniaturized custom electronics that allow us to stream full broadband electrophysiology data simultaneously from all these electrodes (described below). We packaged this system for long-term implantation and developed custom online spike-detection software that can detect action potentials with low latency. Together, this system serves as a state-of-the-art research platform and the first prototype toward a fully implantable human brain-machine interface.
Threads
We have developed a custom process to fabricate minimally displacive neural probes that employ a variety of biocompatible thin film materials. The main substrate and dielectric used in these probes is polyimide, which encapsulates a gold thin film trace. Each thin film array is composed of a “thread” area that features electrode contacts and traces and a “sensor” area where the thin film interfaces with custom chips that enable signal amplification and acquisition. A wafer-level microfabrication process enables high-throughput manufacturing of these devices. Ten thin film devices are patterned on a wafer, each with 3072 electrode contacts.Each array has 48 or 96 threads, each of which contain 32 independent electrodes. Integrated chips are bonded to the contacts on the sensor area of the thin film using a flip-chip bonding process. One goal of this approach is to maintain a small thread cross-sectional area to minimize tissue displacement in the brain. To achieve this, while keeping the channel count high, stepper lithography and other microfabrication techniques are used to form the metal film at submicron resolution.We have designed and manufactured over 20 different thread and electrode types into our arrays; two example designs are shown in Figure 1A and B. Probes are designed either with the reference electrodes on separate threads or on the same threads as the recording electrodes (referred to as “on-probe references”). We have fabricated threads ranging from 5 µm to 50 µm in width that incorporate recording sites of several geometries (Figure 1). Thread thickness is nominally 4-6 µm, which includes up to three layers of insulation and two layers of conductor. Typical thread length is approximately 20 mm. To manage these long, thin threads prior to insertion, parylene-c is deposited onto the threads to form a film on which the threads remain attached until the surgical robot pulls them off. Each thread ends in a 16×50 µm2 loop to accommodate needle threading.Open in a separate windowFigure 1Our novel polymer probes. (A) “Linear Edge” probes, with 32 electrode contacts spaced by 50 μm. (B) “Tree” probes with 32 electrode contacts spaced by 75 μm. (C) Increased magnification of individual electrodes for the thread design in panel A, emphasizing their small geometric surface area. (D) Distribution of electrode impedances (measured at 1 kHz) for two surface treatments: PEDOT (n=257) and IrOx (n=588). IrOx: iridium oxide; PEDOT: poly-ethylenedioxythiophene; PCB: printed circuit board.Since the individual gold electrode sites have small geometric surface areas (Figure 1C), we use surface modifications to lower the impedance for electrophysiology and increase the effective charge-carrying capacity of the interface (Figure 1D). Two such treatments that we have used are the electrically conductive polymer poly-ethylenedioxythiophene doped with polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) [29,30] and iridium oxide (IrOx) [31,32]. In benchtop testing, we have achieved impedances of 36.97 (SD 4.68) kΩ (n=257 electrodes) and 56.46 (SD 7.10) kΩ (n=588) for PEDOT:PSS and IrOx, respectively. The lower impedance of PEDOT:PSS is promising; however, the long-term stability and biocompatibility of PEDOT:PSS are less well established than those for IrOx. These techniques and processes can be improved and further extended to other types of conductive electrode materials and coatings.To keep the electronics package small, a novel alignment and flip-chip bonding process was developed. Multilevel gold stud bumps are placed throughout the printed circuit board (PCB) to act as alignment guides and temporary holders for the thin film. A custom shuttle is used to handle, align, and place the thin film on the PCB such that holes in the thin film slide around the stud bumps. The thin film is secured into place by applying force to the gold stud bumps, which flattens them into rivets. Next, the integrated chips are bonded directly to both contacts on the sensor area of the thin film and pads on the PCB by using standard flip-chip bonding processes. A custom silicon shuttle is used to vacuum pick-up rows of 40-50 capacitors and bond a total of 192 capacitors onto the PCB. This alignment and bonding process was key to creating a package containing 3072 channels in a 23×18.5 mm2 footprint.
Robot
Thin-film polymers have previously been used for electrode probes [21], but their low bending stiffness complicates insertions. Neuralink has developed a robotic insertion approach for inserting flexible probes [28], allowing rapid and reliable insertion of large numbers of polymer probes targeted to avoid vasculature and record from dispersed brain regions. The robot’s insertion head is mounted on a globally accurate, 400×400×150 mm travel, 10-µm three-axis stage and holds a small, quick-swappable “needle-pincher” assembly (Figures 2 and ​and33A).Open in a separate windowFigure 2Needle pincher cartridge compared with a penny for scale. (A) Needle. (B) Pincher. (C) Cartridge.Open in a separate windowFigure 3Insertion process into an agarose brain proxy. (1) The inserter approaches the brain proxy with a thread. (i) needle and cannula. (ii) Previously inserted thread. (2) Inserter touches down on the brain proxy surface. (3) Needle penetrates tissue proxy, advancing the thread to the desired depth. (iii) Inserting thread. (4) Inserter pulls away, leaving the thread behind in the tissue proxy. (iv) Inserted thread.The needle is milled from 40-µm diameter tungsten-rhenium wire-stock electrochemically etched to 24-µm diameter along the inserted length (Figure 2A). The tip of the needle is designed both to hook onto insertion loops—for transporting and inserting individual threads—and to penetrate the meninges and brain tissue. The needle is driven by a linear motor, allowing variable insertion speeds and rapid retraction acceleration (up to 30,000 mm/s2) to encourage separation of the probe from the needle. The pincher is a 50-µm tungsten wire bent at the tip and driven both axially and rotationally (Figure 2B). It serves as a support for probes during transport and as a guide to ensure that threads are inserted along the needle path. Figure 3 shows a sequence of photographs of the insertion process into an agarose brain proxy.The inserter head also holds an imaging stack (Figure 4E-G) used for guiding the needle into the thread loop, insertion targeting, live insertion viewing, and insertion verification. In addition, the inserter head contains six independent light modules, each capable of independently illuminating with 405 nm, 525 nm, and 650 nm or white light (Figure 4C). The 405-nm illumination excites fluorescence from polyimide and allows the optical stack and computer vision to reliably localize the 16×50 µm2 thread loop and execute submicron visual servoing to guide, while illuminated by 650 nm light, the needle through it. Stereoscopic cameras, software-based monocular extended depth-of-field calculations, and illumination with 525 nm light allow for precise estimation of the location of the cortical surface.Open in a separate windowFigure 4The robotic electrode inserter; enlarged view of the inserter-head shown in the inset. (A) Loaded needle pincher cartridge. (B) Low-force contact brain position sensor. (C) Light modules with multiple independent wavelengths. (D) Needle motor. (E) One of four cameras focused on the needle during insertion. (F) Camera with wide angle view of the surgical field. (G) Stereoscopic cameras.The robot registers insertion sites to a common coordinate frame with landmarks on the skull, which, when combined with depth tracking, enables precise targeting of anatomically defined brain structures. An integrated custom software suite allows preselection of all insertion sites, enabling planning of insertion paths optimized to minimize tangling and strain on the threads. The planning feature highlights the ability to avoid vasculature during insertions, one of the key advantages of inserting electrodes individually. This is particularly important, since damage to the blood-brain barrier is thought to play a key role in the brain’s inflammatory response to foreign objects [33].The robot features an autoinsertion mode, which can insert up to six threads (192 electrodes) per minute. Although the entire insertion procedure can be automated, the surgeon retains full control, and, if desired, can make manual microadjustments to the thread position before each insertion into the cortex. The neurosurgical robot is compatible with sterile shrouding and has features to facilitate successful and rapid insertions such as automatic sterile ultrasonic cleaning of the needle. The needle pincher cartridge (Figure 2C) is the portion of the inserter head that makes direct contact with brain tissue and is a consumable that can be replaced midsurgery in under a minute.With this system, we have demonstrated an average of 87.1% (SD 12.6%) insertion success rate over 19 surgeries. In this study, precise manual adjustments were made to avoid microvasculature on the cortical surface, slowing total insertion time from the fastest possible time. Even with these adjustments, the total insertion time for this study averaged approximately 45 min for an approximate insertion rate of 29.6 electrodes per minute (Figure 5). Insertions were made in a 4×7 mm2 bilateral craniotomy with >300 µm spacing between threads to maximize cortical coverage. This demonstrates that robotic insertion of thin polymer electrodes is an efficient and scalable approach for recording from large numbers of neurons in anatomically defined brain regions.Open in a separate windowFigure 5A packaged sensor device. (A) Individual neural processing application-specific integrated circuit capable of processing 256 channels of data. This particular packaged device contains 12 of these chips for a total of 3072 channels. (B) Polymer threads on parylene-c substrate. (C) Titanium enclosure (lid removed). (D) Digital USB-C connector for power and data.
Electronics
Chronic recording from thousands of electrode sites presents significant electronics and packaging challenges. The density of recording channels necessitates placing the signal amplification and digitization stack within the array assembly; otherwise, the cable and connector requirements would be prohibitive. This recording stack must amplify small neural signals (<10 µVRMS) while rejecting out-of-band noise, sample and digitize the amplified signals, and stream out the results for real-time processing—all using minimal power and size.The electronics are built around our custom Neuralink application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC), which consists of 256 individually programmable amplifiers (“analog pixels”), on-chip analog-to-digital converters (ADCs), and peripheral control circuitry for serializing the digitized outputs. The analog pixel is highly configurable: The gains and filter properties can be calibrated to account for variability in signal quality due to process variations and the electrophysiological environment. The on-chip ADC samples at 19.3 kHz with 10-bit resolution. Each analog pixel consumes 5.2 µW, and the whole ASIC consumes approximately 6 mW, including the clock drivers. Performance of the Neuralink ASIC is summarized in Table 1, and a photograph of the fabricated device is shown in Figure 6A.Table 1Neuralink application-specific integrated circuit.VariableValueNumber of channels256Gain, dB42.9-59.4Bandwidth, kHz3-27Input-referred noise (3 Hz-10 kHz), µVRMS5.9Maximum differential input range, mVPP7.2Analog-to-digital converter resolution, bit10Analog pixel power, µW5.2Open in a separate windowOpen in a separate windowFigure 6Thread implantation and packaging. (A) An example perioperative image showing the cortical surface with implanted threads and minimal bleeding. (B) Packaged sensor device (“System B”) chronically implanted in a rat.The Neuralink ASIC forms the core of a modular recording platform that allows for easy replacement of constitutive parts for research and development purposes (Figure 6). In the systems discussed here, a number of ASICs are integrated into a standard PCB using flip-chip integration. Each system consists of a field-programmable gate array; real-time temperature, accelerometer, and magnetometer sensors; and a single USB-C connector for full-bandwidth data transfer. The systems are packaged in titanium cases that are coated with parylene-c, which serves as a moisture barrier to prevent fluid ingress and prolong functional lifetime.We describe two such configurations that we have built—a 1536-channel recording system (“System A”) and a 3072-channel recording system (“System B”)—summarized in Table 2. System A employs the current-generation Neuralink ASIC, while System B uses an earlier revision with comparable functionality but poorer performance specifications.Table 2Two recording system configurations.VariableValueSystem ASystem BNumber of channels15363072Sampling rate, kHz19.318.6Total system power consumption, mW550750Total system size, mm324.5×20×1.6523×18.5×2Implant weight, g1115Open in a separate windowSystem B was designed to maximize channel density and is used for applications that demand extremely high channel count. In contrast, System A was designed to facilitate faster and more reliable manufacturing; it can be built five times faster than System B with better yields.An Ethernet-connected base station converts the data streams from these systems into multicast 10 GB Ethernet user datagram protocol packets, allowing downstream users to process the data in a variety of ways, for example, visualizing the data in real time [34] or writing the data to disk. Each base station can connect to up to three implants simultaneously. These devices are further supported by a software ecosystem that allows for plug and play usability with zero configuration: Neural data begin streaming automatically when a cable is connected.
Electrophysiology
We have implanted both Systems A and B in male Long-Evans rats, as described in the section Robot. All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the National Research Council’s Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Neuralink Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Electrophysiological recordings were taken as the animals freely explored an arena equipped with a commutated cable that permitted unrestricted movement. System A can record 1344 of 1536 channels simultaneously; the exact channel configuration can be arbitrarily specified at the time of recording; System B can record from all 3072 channels simultaneously. Digitized broadband signals were processed in real time to identify action potentials (spikes) using an online detection algorithm.Spike detection requirements for real-time brain-machine interface are different from most conventional neurophysiology requirements. While most electrophysiologists spike-sort data offline and spend significant effort to reject false-positive spike events, brain-machine interface events must be detected in real time and spike detection parameters must maximize decoding efficacy. Using our custom online spike-detection software, we found that a permissive filter that allows an estimated false-positive rate of approximately 0.2 Hz performs better than setting stringent thresholds that may reject real spikes (data not shown).Given these considerations, we set a threshold of >0.35 Hz to quantify the number of electrodes that recorded spiking units. Since we typically do not spike sort our data, we do not report multiple units per channel. Brain-machine interface decoders commonly operate without spike sorting with minimal loss of performance [35,36]. Moreover, recent results show that spike sorting is not necessary to accurately estimate neural population dynamics [37].Data from a recent experiment using System A are shown in Figures 7 and ​and8.8. In this experiment, 40 of 44 attempted insertions were successful (90%) for a total of 1280 implanted electrodes, of which 1020 were recorded simultaneously. The broadband signals recorded from a representative thread show both local field and spiking activity (Figure 7). A sample output of the spike detection pipeline is shown in raster form in Figure 8. In this example, two overlapping recording configurations were used to record from all 1280 implanted channels. On this array, our spiking yield was 43.4% of the channels, with many spikes appearing on multiple neighboring channels, as has been observed in other high-density probes [16,17,21]. On other System A arrays, we observed a spiking yield of 45.60% (SD 0.03%) across 19 surgeries, with a maximum spiking yield of 70%.Open in a separate windowFigure 7The broadband signals recorded from a representative thread. Left: Broadband neural signals (unfiltered) simultaneously acquired from a single thread (32 channels) implanted in rat cerebral cortex. Each channel (row) corresponds to an electrode site on the thread (schematic at left; sites spaced by 50 μm). Spikes and local field potentials are readily apparent. Right: Putative waveforms (unsorted); numbers indicate channel location on thread. Mean waveform is shown in black.Open in a separate windowFigure 8Our devices allow the recording of widespread neural activity distributed across multiple brain regions and cortical layers. Left: Thread insertion sites (colored circles) are indicated on the rendered rodent brain [38]. Right: Raster of 1020 simultaneously recorded channels, sorted per thread (color corresponds to insertion site). Inset: Enlarged raster of spikes from a single thread. This thread corresponds to the one shown in Figure 7.
Discussion
We have described a brain-machine interface with a high-channel count and single-spike resolution. It is based on flexible polymer probes, a robotic insertion system, and custom low-power electronics. This system serves two main purposes: It is a research platform for use in rodents and serves as a prototype for future human clinical implants. The ability to quickly iterate designs and testing in rodents allows for the rapid refinement of devices, manufacturing processes, and software. Because it is a research platform, the system uses a wired connection to maximize the bandwidth for raw data streaming. This is important for performance assessments and crucial for the development of signal processing and decoding algorithms. In contrast, the clinical devices that derive from this platform will be fully implantable, which requires hermetic packaging, and have on-board signal compression, reduced power consumption, wireless power transmission, and data telemetry through the skin without percutaneous leads.Modulating neural activity will be an important part of next-generation clinical brain-machine interfaces [39], for example, to provide a sense of touch or proprioception to neuroprosthetic movement control [40,41]. Therefore, we designed the Neuralink ASIC to be capable of electrical stimulation on every channel, although we have not demonstrated these capabilities here.This brain-machine interface system has several advantages over previous approaches. The size and composition of the thin-film probes are a better match for the material properties of brain tissue than commonly used silicon probes and may therefore exhibit enhanced biocompatibility [28,21]. In addition, the ability to choose where our probes are inserted, including into the subcortical structures, allows us to create custom array geometries for targeting specific brain regions while avoiding vasculature. This feature is significant for creating a high-performance brain-machine interface, as the distribution of electrodes can be customized depending on the task requirements. Lastly, the miniaturization and design of the Neuralink ASIC affords great flexibility in system design and supports very high channel counts within practical size and power constraints.In principle, our approach to brain-machine interfaces is highly extensible and scalable. Here, we report simultaneous broadband recording from over 3000 inserted electrodes in a freely moving rat. In a larger brain, multiple devices with this architecture could be readily implanted, and we could therefore interface with many more neurons without extensive re-engineering. Further development of surgical robotics could allow us to accomplish this without dramatically increasing surgery time.Although significant technological challenges must be addressed before a high-bandwidth device is suitable for clinical application, with such a device, it is plausible to imagine that a patient with spinal cord injury could dexterously control a digital mouse and keyboard. When combined with rapidly improving spinal stimulation techniques [42], in the future, this approach could conceivably restore motor function. High-bandwidth neural interfaces should enable a variety of novel therapeutic possibilities.
Abstract
Background and aimsCOVID-19 and low levels of vitamin D appear to disproportionately affect black and minority ethnic individuals. We aimed to establish whether blood 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) concentration was associated with COVID-19 risk, and whether it explained the higher incidence of COVID-19 in black and South Asian people.MethodsUK Biobank recruited 502,624 participants aged 37–73 years between 2006 and 2010. Baseline exposure data, including 25(OH)D concentration and ethnicity, were linked to COVID-19 test results. Univariable and multivariable logistic regression analyses were performed for the association between 25(OH)D and confirmed COVID-19, and the association between ethnicity and both 25(OH)D and COVID-19.ResultsComplete data were available for 348,598 UK Biobank participants. Of these, 449 had confirmed COVID-19 infection. Vitamin D was associated with COVID-19 infection univariably (OR = 0.99; 95% CI 0.99–0.999; p = 0.013), but not after adjustment for confounders (OR = 1.00; 95% CI = 0.998–1.01; p = 0.208). Ethnicity was associated with COVID-19 infection univariably (blacks versus whites OR = 5.32, 95% CI = 3.68–7.70, p-value<0.001; South Asians versus whites OR = 2.65, 95% CI = 1.65–4.25, p-value<0.001). Adjustment for 25(OH)D concentration made little difference to the magnitude of the association.ConclusionsOur findings do not support a potential link between vitamin D concentrations and risk of COVID-19 infection, nor that vitamin D concentration may explain ethnic differences in COVID-19 infection.Keywords: COVID-19, Vitamin D, Ethnicity
Abstract
The development of the body plan in the Drosophila embryo depends on the activity of maternal determinants localized at the anterior and posterior of the egg. These activities define both the polarity of the anterior-posterior (AP) axis and the spatial domains of expression of the zygotic gap genes, which in turn control the subsequent steps in segmentation. The nature and mode of action of one anterior determinant, the bicoid(bcd) gene product, has recently been defined, but the posterior determinants are less well characterized. At least seven maternally acting genes are required for posterior development. Mutations in these maternal posterior-group genes result in embryos lacking all abdominal segments. Cytoplasmic transplantation studies indicate that the maternally encoded product of the nanos(nos) gene may act as an abdominal determinant, whereas the other maternal posterior-group genes appear to be required for the appropriate localization and stabilization of this signal. Here we show that the lack of the nos gene product can be compensated for by eliminating the maternal activity of the gap gene hunchback (hb). Embryos lacking both of these maternally derived gene products are viable and can survive as fertile adults. These results suggest that the nos gene product functions by repressing the activity of the maternal hb products in the posterior of the egg.
Abstract
BackgroundCytokeratins are specific markers of epithelial cancer cells in bone marrow. We assessed the influence of cytokeratin-positive micrometastases in the bone marrow on the prognosis of women with breast cancer. MethodsWe obtained bone marrow aspirates from both upper iliac crests of 552 patients with stage I, II, or III breast cancer who underwent complete resection of the tumor and 191 patients with nonmalignant disease. The specimens were stained with the monoclonal antibody A45-B/B3, which binds to an antigen on cytokeratins. The median follow-up was 38 months (range, 10 to 70). The primary end point was survival. ResultsCytokeratin-positive cells were detected in the bone marrow specimens of 2 of the 191 control patients with nonmalignant conditions (1 percent) and 199 of the 552 patients with breast cancer (36 percent). The presence of occult metastatic cells in bone marrow was unrelated to the presence or absence of lymph-node metastasis (P=0.13). After four years of follow-up, the presence of micrometastases in bone marrow was associated with the occurrence of clinically overt distant metastasis and death from cancer-related causes (P<0.001), but not with locoregional relapse (P=0.77). Of 199 patients with occult metastatic cells, 49 died of cancer, whereas of 353 patients without such cells, 22 died of cancer-related causes (P<0.001). Among the 301 women without lymph-node metastases, 14 of the 100 with bone marrow micrometastases died of cancer-related causes, as did 2 of the 201 without bone marrow micrometastases (P<0.001). The presence of occult metastatic cells in bone marrow, as compared with their absence, was an independent prognostic indicator of the risk of death from cancer (relative risk, 4.17; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.51 to 6.94; P<0.001), after adjustment for the use of systemic adjuvant chemotherapy. ConclusionsThe presence of occult cytokeratin-positive metastatic cells in bone marrow increases the risk of relapse in patients with stage I, II, or III breast cancer.
Methods
Patients From January 1994 to December 1997, 743 consecutive patients admitted to the I. Frauenklinik at Ludwig Maximilians University in Munich and the Zentralklinikum in Augsburg, Germany, were studied. Patients underwent bone marrow aspiration from both upper iliac crests after providing written informed consent and before the removal of the primary carcinoma. The procedure was approved by the institutional review boards. The stage and grade of the tumor were classified according to the tumor–node–metastasis classification of the Union Internationale contre le Cancer22 by investigators unaware of the immunocytochemical findings in bone marrow. In addition, immunocytochemical analysis of the bone marrow specimens was performed without knowledge of the histopathological results. In this manner, we examined bone marrow obtained from 552 patients with stage I, II, or III breast cancer; 153 patients with benign lesions of the breast, such as fibroadenomas, mastitis, abscesses, and cysts; 11 with simple cysts; 10 with cystadenoma of the ovaries; and 17 with cervical intraepithelial neoplasms of grade I or II. In the 552 patients with breast cancer, the primary surgical treatment consisted of breast conservation in 298 and modified radical mastectomy in 254. The tumor was completely resected in all patients, and the routine procedures included dissection of axillary lymph nodes of levels I and II. For the diagnosis of lymph-node metastasis, single embedded lymph nodes were screened at up to three levels. All 298 patients treated with breast-conserving surgery received radiation therapy. Irradiation of the chest wall followed mastectomy in 94 patients. The median absorbed dose in the target area was either 50.0 Gy, given in 25 fractions, or 50.4 Gy, given in 28 fractions (in patients who received concomitant chemotherapy). Of 170 postmenopausal women with node-positive breast cancer, 72 women who had estrogen-receptor–positive tumors received 20 to 30 mg of tamoxifen daily, and it was recommended that therapy last two to five years. Both premenopausal and postmenopausal patients with estrogen-receptor–negative tumors were treated with chemotherapy. A total of 59 patients with one to three involved axillary lymph nodes received six cycles of chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide (600 mg per square meter of body-surface area), methotrexate (40 mg per square meter), and fluorouracil (600 mg per square meter) every 21 days. In 101 patients who had at least four involved regional lymph nodes, four courses of epirubicin (90 mg per square meter) and cyclophosphamide (600 mg per square meter) were administered, followed by three courses of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil. All 19 patients with evidence of inflammatory breast cancer (all of whom had node-positive cancer) received three cycles of chemotherapy before and after surgery, consisting of either epirubicin and cyclophosphamide or epirubicin (90 mg per square meter) and paclitaxel (175 mg per square meter). Of 301 patients with node-negative cancer, 33 received tamoxifen alone, 23 received more than one agent, and 245 did not receive any systemic adjuvant therapy. At the time of primary surgery, the base-line diagnostic evaluation for distant metastases included plain chest radiography, mammography of the contralateral breast, ultrasonography of the liver, and bone scanning of the entire body. These examinations showed no evidence of distant metastases in any of the patients. After surgery, the patients underwent clinical examinations every three months and were further tested only if they had symptoms. The findings reported here were documented in all patients as of August 16, 1999. Preparation of Bone Marrow The procedure for bone marrow preparation has been described previously.16 In short, while the patient was under general anesthesia bone marrow samples were obtained from each upper iliac crest by needle aspiration during primary surgery and stored in heparin-treated tubes. Mononuclear cells were separated by Ficoll–Hypaque density-gradient centrifugation (density, 1.077 g per mole) at 900×g for 30 minutes, the cells were washed and centrifuged at 150×g for 5 minutes, and 1 million cells were placed on each glass slide.16 Aspirates yielded between 4.0×106 and 6.6×107 bone marrow cells (mean, 1.5×107). Immunocytochemical Analysis For each patient, we screened 2×106 cells by bright-field microscopy; an identical number of cells served as a control for staining with an irrelevant immunoglobulin. We did not use morphologic features to identify cells; we used only immunocytochemical staining. Because there was no background staining, there were no indeterminate results. All slides were examined independently by two observers who agreed on the results for over 95 percent of specimens. In the case of discrepant results, the two investigators reevaluated the slide and eventually reached a consensus. We used monoclonal antibody A45-B/B3 (Micromet, Munich, Germany), which is directed against a common epitope on cytokeratin polypeptides, including the cytokeratin heterodimers 8–18 and 8–19,23 at a concentration of 1.0 to 2.0 μg per milliliter to detect tumor cells in cytospin preparations of bone marrow. The specificity of the antibody reaction in the bone marrow specimens was confirmed by the addition of an unrelated mouse myeloma immunoglobulin at an appropriate dilution. The breast-cancer cell line BT-20 served as a positive control for cytokeratin immunostaining.16 The reaction of the primary antibody was developed with the alkaline phosphatase anti–alkaline phosphatase technique combined with the new fuchsin stain24 to indicate antibody binding, as previously described.16  Statistical Analysis We verified all reported immunocytochemical and histopathological results and reports of events (death, relapse, or recurrent disease) during follow-up by reexamining the original data files. The primary end point was survival, measured from the date of surgery to the time of the last follow-up visit or cancer-related death. Secondary end points were locoregional relapse (including recurrences in the ipsilateral and contralateral breast) and distant metastasis and were measured in the same way as was the primary end point. We constructed Kaplan–Meier life-table curves for survival free of locoregional and distant recurrences and overall survival.25 We used the log-rank test to compare the patients with bone marrow micrometastases with those without micrometastases. Data on patients who were alive and had no evidence of disease at the end of our study were censored. We used Cox proportional-hazards analysis to estimate the prognostic effect of various variables. The variables were entered in a stepwise fashion into the model to compare the independent prognostic value of bone marrow micrometastasis with that of other prognostically relevant variables.26 We used the chi-square test to compare categorical variables. We used the Mann–Whitney U test to assess the differences in the means. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference. All tests were two-tailed. For statistical analyses, we used SPSS software for Macintosh (version 6.1.1).
Results
Detection of Micrometastases Figure 1. Figure 1. Immunostaining of Occult Metastatic Cells in Bone Marrow with Monoclonal Antibody A45-B/B3 (×1000). Panel A shows a single metastatic cell. Panel B shows a cluster of eight micrometastatic cells. There is no immunostaining of surrounding bone marrow cells. Bone marrow aspirates were obtained from 552 patients with newly diagnosed breast cancer, none of whom had a history of epithelial cancer. Of these patients, 199 (36 percent) had cytokeratin-positive tumor cells in the bone marrow at the time of the initial resection of the primary tumor. In most specimens (185 of 199 [93 percent]) the occult cells were present as dispersed single cells (Figure 1A); clusters of cells (Figure 1B) were found in only 7 percent of specimens (14 of 199). The overall frequency of occult metastatic cells in each specimen was low; there was a median of 3 cytokeratin-positive cells (range, 1 to 1223) per 2×106 bone marrow cells analyzed. The numbers of detectable tumor cells increased with the tumor stage; for example, patients with stage I cancer had a mean of 5 tumor cells per 2×106 bone marrow cells, and patients with stage II disease and those with stage III disease had means of 9 and 86 tumor cells per 2×106 bone marrow cells, respectively. Bone marrow aspirates from 191 patients with nonmalignant disease were also analyzed in a blinded fashion, before the final histopathological result was disclosed. In only two patients (1 percent) in this group — one with a chronic benign inflammation of the breast and the other with a benign cystadenoma of the ovary — were specifically stained cytokeratin-positive cells detected. Characteristics of the Patients Table 1. Table 1. Clinical Characteristics of 552 Patients with Breast Cancer, According to the Presence or Absence of Occult Metastatic Cells in Bone Marrow.  Table 1 shows the clinical characteristics of the study population. Most patients (58 percent) had primary tumors that were no more than 2 cm in diameter. Larger primary tumors were associated with a higher incidence of micrometastases than were tumors that were 2 cm or less in diameter (P<0.001). Of 43 patients with stage pT4 tumors (invasion of contiguous structures), 19 had inflammatory breast cancer; 15 of these 19 patients (79 percent) had occult metastatic cells in the marrow (P<0.001). Twenty-three percent of patients with stage pT1a tumors had occult disease, as did 35 percent of patients with stage pT1b tumors and 30 percent of patients with pT1c tumors (P=0.56 for the difference among the groups). Although histologic involvement of axillary lymph nodes is the standard risk factor used for prognos-tic evaluation, we found that the incidence of bone marrow micrometastases was similar in patients with lymph-node metastasis and those without it (P= 0.13). Of 301 patients without clinical or histopathological signs of lymph-node metastases, 100 (33 percent) had cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow (Table 1). Table 1 shows that the number of lymph nodes with metastases was significantly associated with the presence of bone marrow micrometastases (P<0.001). Bone Marrow Micrometastases and Recurrence of Disease Figure 2. Figure 2. Kaplan–Meier Life-Table Analysis of the Survival of Patients with Breast Cancer, According to the Presence or Absence of Micrometastases. Panel A shows survival free of distant metastasis. Patients with occult metastatic cells in bone marrow had a higher risk of relapse than patients without occult metastatic cells (relative risk, 5.99; 95 percent confidence interval, 3.89 to 9.23; P<0.001 by the log-rank test). Panel B shows overall survival. Patients with occult metastatic cells in bone marrow had a higher risk of cancer-related death than patients without occult metastatic cells (relative risk, 4.28; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.59 to 7.09; P<0.001). Panel C shows the overall survival of patients with node-negative cancer and patients with node-positive cancer. Patients with node-negative cancer who had occult metastatic cells had a higher risk of cancer-related death than patients with node-negative cancer who did not have occult metastatic cells (relative risk, 13.26; 95 percent confidence interval, 3.01 to 58.46; P<0.001). Patients with node-positive cancer who had occult metastatic cells had a higher risk of cancer-related death than patients with node-positive cancer who did not have occult metastatic cells (relative risk, 3.32; 95 percent confidence interval, 1.91 to 5.76; P<0.001). There was no significant difference in survival between patients with node-negative cancer who had occult metastatic cells and patients with node-positive cancer who did not have occult metastatic cells (P=0.84). After a median follow-up of 38 months (range, 10 to 70), relapse of the tumor occurred in 135 patients: 28 of these women (21 percent) had locoregional relapse, and 107 (79 percent) had distant metastases. Whereas locoregional relapses were not associated with the presence of micrometastases in bone marrow, as compared with their absence (relative risk of relapse, 0.89; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.39 to 2.01; P=0.77), distant metastasis was significantly associated with the presence of occult micrometastases in the marrow (Figure 2A). Of 33 patients with relapses at visceral sites, 13 had bone marrow involvement. In contrast, micrometastases were found in 18 of 19 patients with relapses in the skeleton and in 48 of 55 patients with relapses at visceral sites in combination with skeletal metastases (P<0.001). Bone Marrow Micrometastases and Survival Of 199 patients with occult metastatic cells, 49 died of cancer-related causes (25 percent), whereas of 353 patients without occult tumor cells in the marrow only 22 died of breast cancer (6 percent). As shown in Figure 2B, patients with bone marrow micrometastasis had a higher risk of death from cancer than patients without bone marrow micrometastases (relative risk, 4.28; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.59 to 7.09; P<0.001). Among women with cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow, as compared with those without such cells, the relative risk of death was 3.32 among patients with node-positive cancer (95 percent confidence interval, 1.91 to 5.76; P<0.001) and 13.26 among patients with node-negative cancer (95 percent confidence interval, 3.01 to 58.46; P<0.001) (Figure 2C). Among 100 patients with node-negative cancer and micrometastases, 14 (14 percent) died of cancer-related causes, whereas only 2 patients (1 percent) died of cancer-related causes in the group of 201 patients without micrometastases. There was no significant difference in survival, however, between patients with node-negative cancer who had micrometastases and patients with node-positive cancer who did not have micrometastases (Figure 2C). Bone Marrow Micrometastases and Adjuvant Therapy Since the occurrence of locoregional relapse and distant metastasis may be influenced by adjuvant treatment, we performed a separate analysis of the 245 patients with node-negative cancer who did not receive systemic adjuvant therapy. Of these patients, 81 (33 percent) had occult metastatic cells. Clinically overt distant metastases occurred in 18 of 81 patients (22 percent) with micrometastases (relative risk of distant metastasis, 7.4; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.7 to 19.9; P<0.001), as compared with 4 of 164 patients (2 percent) without micrometastases. Moreover, among the patients who did not receive adjuvant therapy, the relative risk of cancer-related death was higher among the 81 patients with micrometastases than among the 164 without micrometastases (10 deaths [12 percent] vs. 1 death [1 percent]; relative risk, 18.9; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.4 to 70.5; P<0.001). Among the 51 patients with node-negative cancer who had well-differentiated (grade 1) or moderately well differentiated (grade 2) small tumors (≤1 cm in diameter) that were positive for estrogen receptors, 11 (22 percent) had micrometastases in the marrow. Of these 11 patients, 2 had both locoregional relapse and distant metastases at the time of the last follow-up visit, whereas no such events had occurred among the 40 patients without occult disease. This difference between the 11 patients with micrometastases and the 40 without micrometastases was not statistically significant (P=0.06). Micrometastases and Other Prognostic Variables Table 2. Table 2. Results of Univariate and Multivariate Analyses. We performed a Cox multiple-regression analysis to determine whether the presence of bone marrow micrometastases was a significant predictor of freedom from distant metastases and of overall survival that was independent of age, menopausal status, tumor size, tumor grade, estrogen-receptor status, and lymph-node status. To control for interactions related to systemic treatment, we stratified data according to the use of adjuvant therapy. No independent factor was identified that predicted locoregional recurrence. In contrast, bone marrow micrometastasis, estrogen receptors, and lymph-node metastasis were each independent predictors of both recurrence with distant metastases and cancer-related death (Table 2). On multivariate analysis, the effects of all risk factors decreased markedly, except for the effect of the presence of occult metastatic disease (Table 2).
Discussion
In this study of the hematogenous dissemination of breast-cancer cells, we used a monoclonal antibody (A45-B/B3) that binds to an antigen on cytokeratins 8, 18, and 19. These cytokeratins are expressed by normal and transformed epithelial cells23,27 but not bone marrow cells.16,17 As compared with antibod-ies against single members of the cytokeratin family, A45-B/B3 is more sensitive,16,17 perhaps in part because of the down-regulation of individual cytokeratin polypeptides in some transformed cells.28 The finding of multiple tumor-specific chromosomal aberrations in cytokeratin-positive cells in bone marrow is strong evidence that our method detects micrometastases.21,29  The controversy over the prognostic relevance of the presence or absence of cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow9-11,19,30-33 may be explained by the use of different antibodies, staining techniques, and criteria for defining positively stained cells. The absence of detectable cytokeratin-positive cells in 189 of 191 specimens from control patients with nonmalignant disease in our study (with all analyses performed in a blinded fashion) demonstrates the specificity of A45-B/B3. The two positive results may have been caused by staining of plasmacytoid cells,34 or they may reflect the presence of an occult malignant tumor.14 The specificity of cytokeratin as a marker of epithelial cancer cells seems clear,35 but there remains the problem of the sampling error inherent in examinations of small volumes of aspirated bone marrow. The exclusion of samples with less than the median number of tumor cells (e.g., 3 tumor cells per 2×106 marrow cells) from our analysis did not change the statistical significance of our findings. Moreover, in vitro experiments showed that our assay reproducibly detected a single tumor cell among 1 million bone marrow cells (unpublished data). In this study, we examined a median of 2 million marrow cells from each patient. The shortcomings of current tumor-staging practices are revealed by the facts that distant metasta-ses eventually occur in up to 30 percent of patients with node-negative cancer36 and that approximately 40 percent of patients with node-positive cancer survive for 10 years or more.37,38 Ménard et al. reported that the presence of lymph-node metastases was not a reliable prognostic indicator in biologically defined subgroups of patients,39 suggesting that lymph-node metastases are not necessarily associated with hematogenous spread of cancer. After four years of follow-up, we found that the presence of occult micrometastases in the marrow was associated with a statistically significant reduction in overall survival. Among patients without such micrometastases, overall survival at four years was 93 percent, whereas among patients with one or more cytokeratin-positive micrometastatic cells, it was 68 percent. This association with overall survival was observed in patients with lymph-node metastases and in those without them, as well as in patients who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. The effect of the presence of occult micrometastases was especially clear among patients with node-negative cancer, whose overall survival was similar to that of patients with node-positive cancer who did not have micrometastases. Moreover, the presence of cytokeratin-positive cells in bone marrow was associated with a significantly higher risk of distant metastases but not of locoregional recurrences. In particular, skeletal relapse was strongly related to the presence of micrometastases, suggesting that precursor cells of overt metastases may indeed be present among the dispersed cytokeratin-positive cells we detected in the marrow at the time of diagnosis. Whether patients with bone marrow micrometastases respond differently to adjuvant chemotherapy than patients without micrometastases remains to be studied. However, we have previously demonstrated that the proliferation rate of micrometastases (which might influence their sensitivity to chemotherapy) appears to be rather low.40 In addition, micrometastases in bone marrow are frequently found after chemotherapy, and their presence increases the risk of relapse.41 Because 245 of the 301 patients with node-negative cancer in our study did not receive systemic adjuvant therapy, the influence of occult metastatic cells on prognosis could be assessed independently of such therapy. We believe that the risk of relapse among patients with node-negative cancer who have bone marrow micrometastases may be sufficiently high to warrant the administration of adjuvant chemotherapy. Our findings support the view of Fisher and colleagues,42 who maintained that different pathways of tumor-cell dissemination cause distinct patterns of metastasis. In line with this reasoning are the results of immunohistochemical studies of lymph nodes of patients presumed to have node-negative breast cancer43,44; these studies found no concordance between the presence of lymph-node metastasis and the presence of bone marrow micrometastases. Analysis of the different metastatic routes that independently predict clinical relapse may provide complementary prognostic information. Two recent studies have shown that the long latency period between diagnosis and relapse in patients with breast cancer, even in those with node-positive cancer, may signal the need to monitor these patients for 10 to 15 years to assess the influence of occult metastatic cells on survival.37,38 For this reason, we caution against the overinterpretation of our data, especially in the case of patients with node-negative cancer who have occult metastatic cells, since we have only four years of follow-up data available. Nevertheless, the finding of such cells far from the primary tumor should alert the physician to the possibility of a subsequent relapse. Whether cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow are really precursors of metastasis may be answered in the future by genomic studies of single cells or by analyses involving gene profiling.21 With respect to therapeutic strategies whose aim is to prevent metastatic disease, the detection of bone marrow micrometastases may become a useful means of stratifying risk in the heterogeneous group of patients with node-negative breast cancer.
Abstract
Somatic mutations in cancer genomes are caused by multiple mutational processes, each of which generates a characteristic mutational signature1. Here, as part of the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) Consortium2 of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we characterized mutational signatures using 84,729,690 somatic mutations from 4,645 whole-genome and 19,184 exome sequences that encompass most types of cancer. We identified 49 single-base-substitution, 11 doublet-base-substitution, 4 clustered-base-substitution and 17 small insertion-and-deletion signatures. The substantial size of our dataset, compared with previous analyses3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15, enabled the discovery of new signatures, the separation of overlapping signatures and the decomposition of signatures into components that may represent associated—but distinct—DNA damage, repair and/or replication mechanisms. By estimating the contribution of each signature to the mutational catalogues of individual cancer genomes, we revealed associations of signatures to exogenous or endogenous exposures, as well as to defective DNA-maintenance processes. However, many signatures are of unknown cause. This analysis provides a systematic perspective on the repertoire of mutational processes that contribute to the development of human cancer.
Discussion
There are important constraints, limitations and assumptions in the analytic frameworks used here to characterize mutational signatures. Signatures extracted from sample sets in which multiple processes are operative remain mathematical approximations, with profiles that are potentially influenced by the mathematical approach used and other factors. For conceptual and practical simplicity, we assume that a single signature is associated with each mutational process and provide an average reference signature to represent it. However, we do not discount the possibility that further nuances and variations of signature profiles exist. We have estimated the contributions from each signature to the mutation burden in each sample. However, with increasing numbers of signatures and differences of multiple orders of magnitude in mutation burdens between some signatures, prior knowledge has helped to avoid biologically implausible results. Thus, the further development of methods for deciphering and attributing mutational signatures is warranted, ideally supported by signatures derived from experimental systems in which the causes are known. Nevertheless, signatures with many similarities and some differences can be found by different mathematical approaches, and these can be confirmed in several ways, including experimentally elucidated signatures5,31,39,42,43,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62 and tumours dominated by a single signature (syn12016215).This analysis includes most publicly available exome and whole-genome cancer sequences. Some rare or geographically restricted signatures may not have been captured, signatures conferring limited mutation burdens may have been missed and signatures of therapeutic mutagenic exposures have not been exhaustively explored. Nevertheless, it is likely that a substantial proportion of the naturally occurring mutational signatures found in human cancer have now been described. This comprehensive repertoire provides a foundation for research into the aetiologies of geographical and temporal differences in cancer incidence, the mutational processes that operate in healthy tissues and non-neoplastic disease states, clinical and public health applications of signatures and mechanistic understanding of the mutational processes that underlie carcinogenesis.
Methods
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.These online methods contain an abridged description of the methodology used in the current manuscript; extensive details about the methodology we used are provided in Supplementary Note 2. Importantly, two independently developed computational frameworks (SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer) based on NMF were applied separately to the examined sets of mutational catalogues. SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer take different approaches for deciphering mutational signatures and for assigning each signature to each sample. By using two methods, we aimed to provide a perspective on the effect that different methodologies can have on the numbers of signatures generated, signature profiles and attributions. In addition to applying SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer to cancer data, the tools were also applied to realistic synthetic data with known solutions.Analysis of mutational signatures with SigProfilerSigProfiler incorporates two distinct steps for identification of mutational signatures, based on the previously described methodology6,11,17 (Extended Data Fig. 8). The first step (SigProfilerExtraction) encompasses a hierarchical de novo extraction of mutational signatures based on somatic mutations and their immediate sequence context, and the second step (SigProfilerAttribution) focuses on accurately estimating the number of somatic mutations associated with each extracted mutational signature in each sample. SigProfilerExtraction is an extension of a previous framework for the analysis of mutational signatures11,17. In brief, for a given set of mutational catalogues, the algorithm deciphers a minimal set of mutational signatures that optimally explains the proportion of each mutation type and estimates the contribution of each signature to each sample. More specifically, for each NMF iteration, SigProfilerExtraction minimizes a generalized Kullback–Leibler divergence constrained for nonnegativity (Supplementary Note 2). The algorithm uses multiple NMF iterations (in most cases 1,024) to identify the matrix of mutational signatures and the matrix of the activities of these signatures, as previously described17. The unknown number of signatures is determined by human assessment of the stability and accuracy of solutions for a range of values, as previously described17. The framework is applied hierarchically to increase its ability to find mutational signatures that generate few mutations or are present in few samples.After signatures are discovered by SigProfilerExtraction, SigProfilerAttribution estimates their contributions to individual samples. For each examined sample, the estimation algorithm involves finding the minimum of the Frobenius norm of a constrained function using a nonlinear convex optimization programming solver using the interior-point algorithm63. See Supplementary Note 2 and Extended Data Fig. 8b for further details.Analysis of mutational signatures with SignatureAnalyzerSignatureAnalyzer uses a Bayesian variant of NMF that infers the number of signatures through the automatic relevance determination technique and delivers highly interpretable and sparse representations for both signature profiles and attributions that strike a balance between data fitting and model complexity. Further details of the actual implementation of the computational approach have previously been published9,27,64. SignatureAnalyzer was applied by using a two-step signature extraction strategy using 1,536 pentanucleotide contexts for SBSs, 83 indel features and 78 DBS features. In addition to the separate extraction of SBS, indel and DBS signatures, we performed a ‘COMPOSITE’ signature extraction based on all 1,697 features (1,536 SBS + 78 DBS + 83 indel). For SBSs, the 1,536 SBS COMPOSITE signatures are preferred; for DBSs and indels, the separately extracted signatures are preferred.In step 1 of the two-step extraction process, global signature extraction was performed for the samples with a low mutation burden (n = 2,624). These excluded hypermutated tumours: those with putative polymerase epsilon (POLE) defects or mismatch repair defects (microsatellite instable tumours), skin tumours (which had intense UV-light mutagenesis) and one tumour with temozolomide (TMZ) exposure. Because the underlying algorithm of SignatureAnalyzer performs a stochastic search, different runs can produce different results. In step 1, we ran SignatureAnalyzer 10 times and selected the solution with the highest posterior probability. In step 2, additional signatures unique to hypermutated samples were extracted (again selecting the highest posterior probability over ten runs) while allowing all signatures found in the samples with low mutation burden, to explain some of the spectra of hypermutated samples. This approach was designed to minimize a well-known ‘signature bleeding’ effect or a bias of hyper- or ultramutated samples on the signature extraction. In addition, this approach provided information about which signatures are unique to the hypermutated samples, which was later used when attributing signatures to samples.A similar strategy was used for signature attribution: we performed a separate attribution process for low- and hypermutated samples in all COMPOSITE, SBS, DBS and indel signatures. For downstream analyses, we preferred to use the COMPOSITE attributions for SBSs and the separately calculated attributions for DBSs and indels. Signature attribution in samples with a low mutation burden was performed separately in each tumour type (for example, Biliary–AdenoCA, Bladder–TCC, Bone–Osteosarc, and so on). Attribution was also performed separately in the combined microsatellite instable tumours (n = 39), POLE (n = 9), skin melanoma (n = 107) and TMZ-exposed samples (syn11738314). In both groups, signature availability (which signatures were active, or not) was primarily inferred through the automatic relevance determination process applied to the activity matrix H only, while fixing the signature matrix W. The attribution in samples with a low mutation burden was performed using only signatures found in the step 1 of the signature extraction. Two additional rules were applied in SBS signature attribution to enforce biological plausibility and minimize a signature bleeding: (i) allow SBS4 (smoking signature) only in lung, head and neck cases; and (ii) allow SBS11 (TMZ signature) in a single GBM sample. This was enforced by introducing a binary, signature-by-sample signature indicator matrix Z (1, allowed; 0, not allowed), which was multiplied by the H matrix in every multiplication update of H. No additional rules were applied to indel or DBS signature attributions, except that signatures found in hypermutated samples were not allowed in samples with a low mutation burden.Application of SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer to synthetic dataOur goal was to evaluate SignatureAnalyzer and SigProfiler on realistic synthetic data to identify any potential limitations of these two methods. SignatureAnalyzer and SigProfiler were tested on 11 sets of synthetic data, encompassing a total of 64,400 synthetic samples, in which known signature profiles were used to generate catalogues of synthetic mutational spectra. We operationally defined ‘realistic’ data as those based on the characteristics of either SignatureAnalyzer’s or SigProfiler’s analysis of the PCAWG genome data. SignatureAnalyzer’s reference signature profiles were based on COMPOSITE signatures, consisting of 1,536 types of strand-agnostic SBSs in pentanucleotide context, 78 types of DBSs and 83 types of small indels, for a total of 1,697 mutation types. SigProfiler’s reference analysis was based on strand-agnostic SBSs in the context of one 5′ and one 3′ base. For each test, we generated two sets of realistic data: SigProfiler-realistic (based on SigProfiler’s reference signatures and attributions) and SignatureAnalyzer-realistic (based on SignatureAnalyzer’s reference signatures and attributions), as well as two other types of data that involved using SignatureAnalyzer profiles with SigProfiler attributions and vice versa. A detailed description of each of the 11 sets of synthetic data and the results from applying SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer are provided in Supplementary Note 2.Analysis of clustered mutational signaturesSomatic SBSs were considered clustered if they had intermutational distances < 1,000 bp. More specifically, for each sample, an SBS mutational catalogue was generated for substitutions that were <1,000 bp from another substitution. Subsequently, the set of SBS mutational catalogues containing clustered mutations underwent de novo extraction of mutational signatures. Any novel mutational signature (one that was not previously observed in the complete SBS catalogues) was reported as a clustered mutational signature.Better separation compared to COSMIC v.2 signaturesAs described in the manuscript, all mutational signatures previously reported in COSMIC v.2 were confirmed in the new set of analyses with median cosine similarity of 0.95. However, the separation between the COSMIC v.2 mutational signatures (https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures_v2) is much worse than the separation between the mutational signatures reported here. For example, in COSMIC v.2, signatures 5 and 16 had a cosine similarity of 0.90, making them hard to distinguish from one another. By contrast, in the current analysis, SBS5 and SBS16 have a cosine similarity of 0.65. This allows us to unambiguously assign SBS5 and SBS16 to different samples. In the current analysis, the larger number of samples has allowed the reduction of bleeding between signatures and has given more unique and easily distinguishable signatures. One can evaluate the overall separation of a set of mutational signatures by examining the distribution of cosine similarities between the signatures in the set. The signatures in COSMIC v.2 had a median cosine similarity of 0.238. By contrast, the current signatures have a much lower median cosine similarity of 0.098. This twofold reduction in similarity is highly statistically significant (P value 9.1 × 10−25) and indicates a better separation between the signatures in the current analysis.Correlations of mutational signature activity with ageBefore evaluating the association between age and the activity of a mutational signature, all outliers for both age and numbers of mutations attributed to a signature in a cancer type were removed from the data. An outlier was defined as any value outside three standard deviations from the mean value. A robust linear regression model that estimated the slope of the line and whether this slope was significantly different from zero (F test; P value < 0.05) was performed using the MATLAB function robustfit (https://www.mathworks.com/help/stats/robustfit.html) with default parameters. The P values from the F tests were corrected using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure for false discovery rates. Results are available at syn12030687 and syn20317940.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Abstract
Pain is an integrative phenomenon that results from dynamic interactions between sensory and contextual (i.e., cognitive, emotional, and motivational) processes. In the brain the experience of pain is associated with neuronal oscillations and synchrony at different frequencies. However, an overarching framework for the significance of oscillations for pain remains lacking. Recent concepts relate oscillations at different frequencies to the routing of information flow in the brain and the signaling of predictions and prediction errors. The application of these concepts to pain promises insights into how flexible routing of information flow coordinates diverse processes that merge into the experience of pain. Such insights might have implications for the understanding and treatment of chronic pain.
Abstract
Investigation of tree growth in Isle Royale National Park in Michigan revealed the influence of herbivores and carnivores on plants in an intimately linked food chain. Plant growth rates were regulated by cycles in animal density and responded to annual changes in primary productivity only when released from herbivory by wolf predation. Isle Royale's dendrochronology complements a rich literature on food chain control in aquatic systems, which often supports a trophic cascade model. This study provides evidence of top-down control in a forested ecosystem.
Abstract
The vagaries of history lead to the prediction that repeated instances of evolutionary diversification will lead to disparate outcomes even if starting conditions are similar. We tested this proposition by examining the evolutionary radiation of Anolis lizards on the four islands of the Greater Antilles. Morphometric analyses indicate that the same set of habitat specialists, termed ecomorphs, occurs on all four islands. Although these similar assemblages could result from a single evolutionary origin of each ecomorph, followed by dispersal or vicariance, phylogenetic analysis indicates that the ecomorphs originated independently on each island. Thus, adaptive radiation in similar environments can overcome historical contingencies to produce strikingly similar evolutionary outcomes.
Abstract
A series of dipyridodiazepinones have been shown to be potent inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT). One compound, BI-RG-587, had a Ki of 200 nanomolar for inhibition of HIV-1 RT that was noncompetitive with respect to deoxyguanosine triphosphate. BI-RG-587 was specific for HIV-1 RT, having no effect on feline and simian RT or any mammalian DNA polymerases. BI-RG-587 inhibited HIV-1 replication in vitro as demonstrated by in situ hybridization, inhibition of protein p24 production, and the lack of syncytia formation in cultured human T cell lines and freshly isolated human peripheral blood lymphocytes. Cytotoxicity studies of BI-RG-587 on human cells showed a high therapeutic index (greater than 8000) in culture.
Abstract
A complementary DNA for the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein (GFP) produces a fluorescent product when expressed in prokaryotic (Escherichia coli) or eukaryotic (Caenorhabditis elegans) cells. Because exogenous substrates and cofactors are not required for this fluorescence, GFP expression can be used to monitor gene expression and protein localization in living organisms.
Abstract
Many filamentous cyanobacteria grow as multicellular organisms that show a developmental pattern of single nitrogen-fixing heterocysts separated by approximately 10 vegetative cells. Overexpression of a 54-base-pair gene, patS, blocked heterocyst differentiation in Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. A patS null mutant showed an increased frequency of heterocysts and an abnormal pattern. Expression of a patS-gfp reporter was localized in developing proheterocysts. The addition of a synthetic peptide corresponding to the last five amino acids of PatS inhibited heterocyst development. PatS appears to control heterocyst pattern formation through intercellular signaling mechanisms.
Abstract
Retrotransposition of processed mRNAs is a common source of novel sequence acquired during the evolution of genomes. Although the vast majority of retroposed gene copies, or retrogenes, rapidly accumulate debilitating mutations that disrupt the reading frame, a small percentage become new genes that encode functional proteins. By using a multibreed association analysis in the domestic dog, we demonstrate that expression of a recently acquired retrogene encoding fibroblast growth factor 4 (fgf4) is strongly associated with chondrodysplasia, a short-legged phenotype that defines at least 19 dog breeds including dachshund, corgi, and basset hound. These results illustrate the important role of a single evolutionary event in constraining and directing phenotypic diversity in the domestic dog.
Challenges in treating COVID-19
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which appeared in December 2019, presents a global challenge, particularly in the rapid increase of critically ill patients with pneumonia and absence of definitive treatment. To date, over 81,000 cases have been confirmed, with over 2700 deaths. The mortality appears to be around 2%; early published data indicate 25.9% with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia required ICU admission and 20.1% developed acute respiratory distress syndrome [1].There is presently no vaccine or specific anti-viral drug regime used to treat critically ill patients. The management of patients mainly focuses on the provision of supportive care, e.g., oxygenation, ventilation, and fluid management. Combination treatment of low-dose systematic corticosteroids and anti-virals and atomization inhalation of interferon have been encouraged as part of critical COVID-19 management [2]. Other reported therapeutic agents that are used for the treatment of seriously ill patients have been noted in Table 1.
Table 1Potential treatment options of COVID-19ClassesPotential treatment optionsReferenceAnti-viral> 85% of patients received anti-viral agents, including oseltamivir (75 mg every 12 h orally), ganciclovir (0.25 g every 12 h intravenously), and lopinavir/ritonavir tablets (400/100 mg twice daily). Remdesivir is currently under trials at more than ten medical institutions in Wuhan and has been known to prevent MERS-CoV.[1]Anti-malarialAn old anti-malarial, chloroquine phosphate, has been effective in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia due to its anti-viral and anti-inflammatory activities.[3]Herbal treatmentsThere was widespread use of Traditional Chinese Medicine during the last SARS-COV outbreak and it is currently being used in China. The five most commonly used herbs were Astragali Radix (Huangqi), Glycyrrhizae Radix Et Rhizoma (Gancao), Saposhnikoviae Radix (Fangfeng), Atractylodis Macrocephalae Rhizoma (Baizhu), and Lonicerae Japonicae Flo.[4]Open in a separate window
Convalescent plasma: one of the forgotten immunologically based strategies
Passive immunization has been successfully used to treat infectious diseases. A meta-analysis demonstrated a significant reduction in mortality and viral load in studies using convalescent plasma for the treatment of severe acute viral respiratory infections, including those caused by related coronaviruses (SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV) [5]. Serious adverse events were not reported. Eighty SARS patients were treated with convalescent plasma during the last major outbreak. A significantly better outcome was obtained with earlier transfusion (before day 14), and no immediate adverse events were observed.A feasibility intervention study of convalescent plasma for MERS-CoV infection treatment failed to identify sufficient high-titer plasma from patients with confirmed/suspected MERS, their close family members, or healthcare workers exposed to MERS (n = 12 reactive ELISA/443 serum tested). Two fresh-frozen plasma units (250–350 mL/unit) would be required for each enrolled MERS patient ({"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT02190799","term_id":"NCT02190799"}}NCT02190799). Encouragingly, anti-MERS CoV titers measured by ELISA correlated with microneutralization (MN) assays [6].There are currently over 30,000 recovered COVID-19 patients, who could present a valuable resource of convalescent plasma for health care providers. China National Biotec Group Co has claimed that 10 seriously ill patients receiving this immunoglobulin therapy demonstrated improved oxygenation and reduced inflammation and viral load [7]. High-titer specific antibodies should be able to bind to SARS-CoV-2 and neutralize the viral particles, block access to uninfected cells, and activate potent effector mechanisms (e.g., complement activation and phagocytosis).
Conclusion
In the absence of definitive management protocols, many treatment regimes have been explored in the treatment of COVID-19. Some of these treatments may have been tried out of desperation, and among these, some show initial promise. However, it is too early to see any published results of rigorous clinical trials.Using the serum of recovered patients is a tried and tested approach, and trials are underway to study its effectiveness. This treatment appears to be helpful in the short term until definitive and effective treatments are found.
Abstract
Background:
      
    

    
      Remdesivir, a nucleotide analogue prodrug that inhibits viral RNA polymerases, has shown in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      We provided remdesivir on a compassionate-use basis to patients hospitalized with Covid-19, the illness caused by infection with SARS-CoV-2. Patients were those with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection who had an oxygen saturation of 94% or less while they were breathing ambient air or who were receiving oxygen support. Patients received a 10-day course of remdesivir, consisting of 200 mg administered intravenously on day 1, followed by 100 mg daily for the remaining 9 days of treatment. This report is based on data from patients who received remdesivir during the period from January 25, 2020, through March 7, 2020, and have clinical data for at least 1 subsequent day.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      Of the 61 patients who received at least one dose of remdesivir, data from 8 could not be analyzed (including 7 patients with no post-treatment data and 1 with a dosing error). Of the 53 patients whose data were analyzed, 22 were in the United States, 22 in Europe or Canada, and 9 in Japan. At baseline, 30 patients (57%) were receiving mechanical ventilation and 4 (8%) were receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. During a median follow-up of 18 days, 36 patients (68%) had an improvement in oxygen-support class, including 17 of 30 patients (57%) receiving mechanical ventilation who were extubated. A total of 25 patients (47%) were discharged, and 7 patients (13%) died; mortality was 18% (6 of 34) among patients receiving invasive ventilation and 5% (1 of 19) among those not receiving invasive ventilation.
    

    
  


        Conclusions:
      
    

    
      In this cohort of patients hospitalized for severe Covid-19 who were treated with compassionate-use remdesivir, clinical improvement was observed in 36 of 53 patients (68%). Measurement of efficacy will require ongoing randomized, placebo-controlled trials of remdesivir therapy. (Funded by Gilead Sciences.).
Abstract
This article introduces a new and unobtrusive wearable monitoring device based on electrodermal activity (EDA) to be used in health-related computing systems. This paper introduces the description of the wearable device capable of acquiring the EDA of a subject in order to detect his/her calm/distress condition from the acquired physiological signals. The lightweight wearable device is placed in the wrist of the subject to allow continuous physiological measurements. With the aim of validating the correct operation of the wearable EDA device, pictures from the International Affective Picture System are used in a control experiment involving fifty participants. The collected signals are processed, features are extracted and a statistical analysis is performed on the calm/distress condition classification. The results show that the wearable device solely based on EDA signal processing reports around 89% accuracy when distinguishing calm condition from distress condition.Keywords: wearable, electrodermal activity, arousal, valence, distress, calmness
Abstract
A key mutational process in cancer is structural variation, in which rearrangements delete, amplify or reorder genomic segments that range in size from kilobases to whole chromosomes1,2,3,4,5,6,7. Here we develop methods to group, classify and describe somatic structural variants, using data from the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) Consortium of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), which aggregated whole-genome sequencing data from 2,658 cancers across 38 tumour types8. Sixteen signatures of structural variation emerged. Deletions have a multimodal size distribution, assort unevenly across tumour types and patients, are enriched in late-replicating regions and correlate with inversions. Tandem duplications also have a multimodal size distribution, but are enriched in early-replicating regions—as are unbalanced translocations. Replication-based mechanisms of rearrangement generate varied chromosomal structures with low-level copy-number gains and frequent inverted rearrangements. One prominent structure consists of 2–7 templates copied from distinct regions of the genome strung together within one locus. Such cycles of templated insertions correlate with tandem duplications, and—in liver cancer—frequently activate the telomerase gene TERT. A wide variety of rearrangement processes are active in cancer, which generate complex configurations of the genome upon which selection can act.
Discussion
We have described the patterns and signatures of structural variation in a large cohort of uniformly analysed cancer genomes. A major grouping of patterns in structural variants that emerges from our study is one in which extra copies of genomic templates are inserted during the rearrangement process. This includes simple events such as tandem duplications, as well as a range of more-complex events with duplications and triplications that are rearranged locally as well as inserted distantly. Our signature analysis grouped a large proportion of these more-complex events together with tandem duplications, which suggests that they represent a continuum of processes that share underlying properties. A replication-based mechanism has previously been proposed to explain local two-jumps4,23,24, in which stalled replication forks or other DNA lesions cause the DNA polymerase to switch templates and continue replication in a new location. Studies in experimental models are now revealing that a wide range of mechanisms and DNA lesions can result in templated insertions: these mechanisms include tandem duplications in BRCA1 deficiency10, translocations with templated insertions caused by dysregulated strand invasion38 and distant templated insertions in the absence of replication helicases39.Genomic instability in cancer is not a single phenomenon. Instead, many different mutational processes can act to restructure the genome and, in doing so, generate a notably flexible array of possible structures. Any given tumour draws on a subset of the available processes, shaped by the cell of origin, germline predisposition and other, unknown, factors: selection then does the rest, promoting the clone that has chanced on the structure that increases its potential for self-determination.
Methods
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.A detailed description of the methods used in this paper and many additional results are described in Supplementary Information. Here, we summarize the key aspects of the analysis.Generation of the structural-variant call setThe final set of structural variants used in this Article was generated by the Technical Working Group of the PCAWG Consortium and is described in the main PCAWG paper8. In brief, four variant callers were used to identify somatically acquired structural variants from matched tumour and germline whole genome sequencing data: SvABA (Broad pipeline), DELLY (DKFZ pipeline), BRASS (Sanger pipeline) and dRanger (Broad pipeline). These were merged into a final call set using a graph-based algorithm to identify overlapping breakpoint junctions across algorithms. Detailed visual inspection of structural-variant calls suggested that a simple approach of accepting all structural-variant calls made by two or more of the four algorithms gave the best trade-off between sensitivity and specificity.Structural-variant clustering and annotationTo identify clusters of structural variants, we developed a method for grouping structural variants into clusters and footprints to allow structural and mechanistic inferences to be made systematically. In parallel, we processed the somatic copy-number data and merged it with structural-variant junctions to enable us produce rearrangement patterns from the generated structural-variant clusters and footprints. We produced normalized representations of structural-variant cluster patterns, which enable us to tabulate the number of different cluster and footprint patterns and analyse their features. Finally, we performed manual and simulation-assisted interpretation of the recurrently observed cluster and footprint patterns. The individual steps of the structural-variant classification pipeline are outlined below and detailed in the subsequent subsections: (1) computing the exact breakpoint coordinates from clipped reads; (2) removing redundant ‘segment-bypassing’ structural variants; (3) merging rearrangement breakpoints with copy-number data to yield structural-variant breakpoint-demarcated, normalized, absolute copy-number data; (4) clustering individual structural variants into structural-variant clusters and footprints; (5) heuristically refining structural-variant clusters and footprints; (6) filtering artefactual fold-back-type structural variants with insufficient support; (7) determining balanced overlapping breakpoints (this step is to distinguish very short templated insertions from mutually overlapping balanced breakpoints); and (8) computing rearrangement patterns and categories.Distribution of structural variants across the genomeWe divided the hg19 human reference genome (autosomes and chromosome X) into 3,036,315 pixels of 1 kb, and calculated a suite of metrics per pixel to summarize a variety of genome properties with potential relevance to the distribution of rearrangements, as listed in the Supplementary Information. Properties were matched as closely as possible to the tissue of origin for cancer samples from the PCAWG data. All other genome properties were held fixed across all tissues. To test for associations between structural-variant event classes and the library of genome properties, the genome property metrics were compared between real structural-variant positions (randomly choosing one side of each breakpoint junction to reduce dependence between observations) and one million uniform random positions from the callable genome space. To compare the tissue-specific properties, each random position was assigned a random tissue type, drawing from the observed tissue-type distribution in the structural-variant call set. For each genome property and each event class, the real observations were pooled amongst the random ones, and then rank-transformed and normalized on a scale from 0 to 1. Under the null hypothesis of no event-versus-property association, the ranks of the real observations would follow a uniform distribution. We tested this in each case with a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test then applied a Benjamini–Yekutieli correction for false-discovery rate across the entire suite of tests and set the threshold for significance reporting at 0.01.Structural-variant-signature analysisWe used two algorithms for extracting structural-variant signatures. Both used the same input files, comprising a matrix of counts per patient (across all patients) of structural-variant clusters falling into a number of mutually exclusive categories. These categories included the major classes of structural variants, with the more-common events (deletions, tandem duplications and inversions) split by size and/or replication timing. The two algorithms that were  used for extracting the signatures were (1) a hierarchical Dirichlet process and (2) non-negative matrix factorization. Further details on the implementation of these algorithms are available in the Supplementary Information.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Abstract
In immigration enforcement, many undocumented immigrants with children are often detained and deported. But it is their US-born citizen-children that have been overlooked in immigration debates and enforcement policies and practices. Citizen-children are at risk for negative psychological outcomes when families are fractured and destabilized by arrest, detention, and deportation. The children risk being torn from their parents and, often, their undocumented siblings. To add to the small but growing empirical base on the effects of living under the threat of deportation and actual deportation of parents, we compared the psychological status of three groups of citizen-children: (1) a group living in Mexico with their deported parents; (2) a group in the US with parents affected by detention or deportation; and (3) a comparison group of citizen-children whose undocumented parents were not affected by detention or deportation. We compared children on self-report and parent-report measures of behavioral adjustment, depression, anxiety, and self-concept. Across the three groups we found elevated levels of distress, and differences between children who had experienced a parent's detention or deportation and those who had not. We discuss findings in the context of children's clinical needs, future research, and implications for immigration enforcement policy and practices.
Abstract
Cancer is driven by genetic change, and the advent of massively parallel sequencing has enabled systematic documentation of this variation at the whole-genome scale1,2,3. Here we report the integrative analysis of 2,658 whole-cancer genomes and their matching normal tissues across 38 tumour types from the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) Consortium of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We describe the generation of the PCAWG resource, facilitated by international data sharing using compute clouds. On average, cancer genomes contained 4–5 driver mutations when combining coding and non-coding genomic elements; however, in around 5% of cases no drivers were identified, suggesting that cancer driver discovery is not yet complete. Chromothripsis, in which many clustered structural variants arise in a single catastrophic event, is frequently an early event in tumour evolution; in acral melanoma, for example, these events precede most somatic point mutations and affect several cancer-associated genes simultaneously. Cancers with abnormal telomere maintenance often originate from tissues with low replicative activity and show several mechanisms of preventing telomere attrition to critical levels. Common and rare germline variants affect patterns of somatic mutation, including point mutations, structural variants and somatic retrotransposition. A collection of papers from the PCAWG Consortium describes non-coding mutations that drive cancer beyond those in the TERT promoter4; identifies new signatures of mutational processes that cause base substitutions, small insertions and deletions and structural variation5,6; analyses timings and patterns of tumour evolution7; describes the diverse transcriptional consequences of somatic mutation on splicing, expression levels, fusion genes and promoter activity8,9; and evaluates a range of more-specialized features of cancer genomes8,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18.
Methods
SamplesWe compiled an inventory of matched tumour–normal whole-cancer genomes in the ICGC Data Coordinating Centre. Most samples came from treatment-naive, primary cancers, although a small number of donors had multiple samples of primary, metastatic and/or recurrent tumours. Our inclusion criteria were: (1) matched tumour and normal specimen pair; (2) a minimal set of clinical fields; and (3) characterization of tumour and normal whole genomes using Illumina HiSeq paired-end sequencing reads.We collected genome data from 2,834 donors, representing all ICGC and TCGA donors that met these criteria at the time of the final data freeze in autumn 2014 (Extended Data Table 1). After quality assurance (Supplementary Methods 2.5), data from 176 donors were excluded as unusable, 75 had minor issues that could affect some analyses (grey-listed donors) and 2,583 had data of optimal quality (white-listed donors)(Supplementary Table 1). Across the 2,658 white- and grey-listed donors, whole-genome sequences were available from 2,605 primary tumours and 173 metastases or local recurrences. Matching normal samples were obtained from blood (2,064 donors), tissue adjacent to the primary tumour (87 donors) or from distant sites (507 donors). Whole-genome sequencing data were available for tumour and normal DNA for the entire cohort. The mean read coverage was 39× for normal samples, whereas tumours had a bimodal coverage distribution with modes at 38× and 60× (Supplementary Fig. 1). The majority of specimens (65.3%) were sequenced using 101-bp paired-end reads. An additional 28% were sequenced with 100-bp paired-end reads. Of the remaining specimens, 4.7% were sequenced with read lengths longer than 101 bp, and 1.9% with read lengths shorter than 100 bp. The distribution of read lengths by tumour cohort is shown in Supplementary Fig. 11. Median read length for whole-genome sequencing paired-end reads was 101 bp (mean = 106.2, s.d. = 16.7; minimum–maximum = 50–151). RNA-sequencing data were collected and re-analysed centrally for 1,222 donors, including 1,178 primary tumours, 67 metastases or local recurrences and 153 matched normal tissue samples adjacent to the primary tumour.Demographically, the cohort included 1,469 men (55%) and 1,189 women (45%), with a mean age of 56 years (range, 1–90 years) (Supplementary Table 1). Using population ancestry-differentiated single nucleotide polymorphisms, the ancestry distribution was heavily weighted towards donors of European descent (77% of total) followed by East Asians (16%), as expected for large contributions from European, North American and Australian projects (Supplementary Table 1).We consolidated histopathology descriptions of the tumour samples, using the ICD-0-3 tumour site controlled vocabulary89. Overall, the PCAWG dataset comprises 38 distinct tumour types (Extended Data Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1). Although the most common tumour types are included in the dataset, their distribution does not match the relative population incidences, largely owing to differences among contributing ICGC/TCGA groups in the numbers of sequenced samples.Uniform processing and somatic variant callingTo generate a consistent set of somatic mutation calls that could be used for cross-tumour analyses, we analysed all 6,835 samples using a uniform set of algorithms for alignment, variant calling and quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 2, Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Methods 2). We used the BWA-MEM algorithm90 to align each tumour and normal sample to human reference build hs37d5 (as used in the 1000 Genomes Project91). Somatic mutations were identified in the aligned data using three established pipelines, which were run independently on each tumour–normal pair. Each of the three pipelines—labelled ‘Sanger’92,93,94,95, ‘EMBL/DKFZ’96,97 and ‘Broad’98,99,100,101 after the computational biology groups that created or assembled them—consisted of multiple software packages for calling somatic SNVs, small indels, CNAs and somatic SVs (with intrachromosomal SVs defined as those >100 bp). Two additional variant algorithms102,103 were included to further improve accuracy across a broad range of clonal and subclonal mutations. We tested different merging strategies using validation data, and choses the optimal method for each variant type to generate a final consensus set of mutation calls (Supplementary Methods S2.4).Somatic retrotransposition events, including Alu and LINE-1 insertions72, L1-mediated transductions73 and pseudogene formation104, were called using a dedicated pipeline73. We removed these retrotransposition events from the somatic SV call-set. Mitochondrial DNA mutations were called using a published algorithm105. RNA-sequencing data were uniformly processed to quantify normalized gene-level expression, splicing variation and allele-specific expression, and to identify fusion transcripts, alternative promoter usage and sites of RNA editing8.Integration, phasing and validation of germline variant call-setsCalls of common (≥1% frequency in PCAWG) and rare (<1%) germline variants including single-nucleotide polymorphisms, indels, SVs and mobile-element insertions (MEIs) were generated using a population-scale genetic polymorphism-detection approach91,106. The uniform germline data-processing workflow comprised variant identification using six different variant-calling algorithms96,107,108 and was orchestrated using the Butler workflow system109.We performed call-set benchmarking, merging, variant genotyping and statistical haplotype-block phasing91 (Supplementary Methods 3.4). Using this strategy, we identified 80.1 million germline single-nucleotide polymorphisms, 5.9 million germline indels, 1.8 million multi-allelic short (<50 bp) germline variants, as well as germline SVs ≥ 50 bp in size including 29,492 biallelic deletions and 27,254 MEIs (Supplementary Table 2). We statistically phased this germline variant set using haplotypes from the 1000 Genomes Project91 as a reference panel, yielding an N50-phased block length of 265 kb based on haploid chromosomes from donor-matched tumour genomes. Precision estimates for germline SNVs and indels were >99% for the phased merged call-set, and sensitivity estimates ranged from 92% to 98%.Core alignment and variant calling by cloud computingThe requirement to uniformly realign and call variants on nearly 5,800 whole genomes (tumour plus normal) presented considerable computational challenges, and raised ethical issues owing to the use of data from different jurisdictions (Extended Data Table 2). To process the data, we adopted a cloud-computing architecture26 in which the alignment and variant calling was spread across 13 data centres on 3 continents, representing a mixture of commercial, infrastructure-as-a-service, academic cloud compute and traditional academic high-performance computer clusters (Supplementary Table 3). Together, the effort used 10 million CPU-core hours.To generate reproducible variant calling across the 13 data centres, we built the core pipelines into Docker containers28, in which the workflow description, required code and all associated dependencies were packaged together in stand-alone packages. These heavily tested, extensively validated workflows are available for download (Box 1).Validation, benchmarking and merging of somatic variant callsTo evaluate the performance of each of the mutation-calling pipelines and determine an integration strategy, we performed a large-scale deep-sequencing validation experiment (Supplementary Notes 1). We selected a pilot set of 63 representative tumour–normal pairs, on which we ran the 3 core pipelines, together with a set of 10 additional somatic variant-calling pipelines contributed by members of the PCAWG SNV Calling Methods Working Group. Sufficient DNA remained for 50 of the 63 cases for validation, which was performed by hybridization of tumour and matched normal DNA to a custom RNA bait set, followed by deep sequencing, as previously described29. Although performed using the same sequencing chemistry as the original whole-genome sequencing analyses, the considerably greater depth achieved in the validation experiment enabled accurate assessment of sensitivity and precision of variant calls. Variant calls in repeat-masked regions were not tested, owing to the challenge of designing reliable validation probes in these areas.The 3 core pipelines had individual estimates of sensitivity of 80–90% to detect a true somatic SNV called by any of the 13 pipelines; with >95% of SNV calls made by each of the core pipelines being genuine somatic variants (Fig. 1a). For indels—a more-challenging class of variants to identify in short-read sequencing data—the 3 core algorithms had individual sensitivity estimates in the range of 40–50%, with precision 70–95% (Fig. 1b). Validation of SV calls is inherently more difficult, as methods based on PCR or hybridization to RNA baits often fail to isolate DNA that spans the breakpoint. To assess the accuracy of SV calls, we therefore used the property that an SV must either generate a copy-number change or be balanced, whereas artefactual calls will not respect this property. For individual SV-calling algorithms, we estimated precision to be in the range of 80–95% for samples in the 63-sample pilot dataset.Next, we examined multiple methods for merging calls made by several algorithms into a single definitive call-set to be used for downstream analysis. The final consensus calls for SNVs were based on a simple approach that required two or more methods to agree on a call. For indels, because methods were less concordant, we used stacked logistic regression110,111 to integrate the calls. The merged SV set includes all calls made by two or more of the four primary SV-calling algorithms96,100,112,113. Consensus CNA calls were obtained by joining the outputs of six individual CNA-calling algorithms with SV consensus breakpoints to obtain base-pair resolution CNAs (Supplementary Methods 2.4.3). Consensus purity and ploidy were derived, and a multi tier system was developed for consensus copy-number calls (Supplementary Methods 2.4.3, and described in detail elsewhere7).Overall, the sensitivity and precision of the consensus somatic variant calls were 95% (90% confidence interval, 88–98%) and 95% (90% confidence interval, 71–99%), respectively, for SNVs (Extended Data Fig. 2). For somatic indels, sensitivity and precision were 60% (90% confidence interval, 34–72%) and 91% (90% confidence interval, 73–96%), respectively. Regarding SVs, we estimate the sensitivity of the merging algorithm to be 90% for true calls generated by any one calling pipeline; precision was estimated to be 97.5%. That is, 97.5% of SVs in the merged SV call-set had an associated copy-number change or balanced partner rearrangement. The improvement in calling accuracy from combining different pipelines was most noticeable in variants that had low variant allele fractions, which are likely to originate from subclonal populations of the tumour (Fig. 1c, d). There remains much work to be done to improve indel calling software; we still lack sensitivity for calling even fully clonal complex indels from short-read sequencing data.
Abstract
Objective:
      
    

    
      To investigate the therapeutic effect of CBD-ointment administered on severe skin chronic diseases and/or on their outcome scars.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      A spontaneous, anecdotal, retrospective study of 20 patients with two most frequent skin disorders: psoriasis (n: 5 patients), atopic dermatitis (n: 5) and resulting outcome scars (n: 10). The subjects were instructed to administer topical CBD-enriched ointment to lesioned skin areas twice daily for three months treatment.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      Based on skin evaluations (hydration, TEWL, elasticity), clinical questionnaires (SCORAD, ADI, PASI), and supported by photographic data and investigators' clinical assessment, the results showed that topical treatment with CBD-enriched ointment significantly improved the skin parameters, the symptoms and also the PASI index score. No irritant or allergic reactions were documented during the period treatment.
    

    
  


        Conclusions:
      
    

    
      The topical administration of CBD ointment, without any THC, is a safe and effective non-invasive alternative for improve the quality of life in patients with some skin disorders, especially on inflammatory background.
Abstract
Objective:
      
    

    
      To evaluate trends by race in Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality obstetric-related quality and safety indicators and their relationships to trends in inpatient maternal and neonatal mortality.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      We used the Nationwide Inpatient Sample from 2000 through 2009 and calculated obstetric hospital quality and patient safety indicators and inpatient maternal and neonatal mortality stratified by race. We examined differences in age and comorbidity-adjusted trends in black compared with white women over time in the United States and by geographic region. Proportions were analyzed by χ2 and trends by regression analysis.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      Obstetric quality indicators varied by geographic region, but changes over time were consistent for both races. Cesarean deliveries increased similarly for black and white women, and vaginal births after cesarean delivery declined for both races but more rapidly for white women than for black women. Obstetric safety indicators improved over the study period for black and white women, with obstetric trauma decreasing significantly for both groups (28% compared with 35%, respectively) and birth trauma-injury to neonates declining for both, but changes were not significant. In striking contrast, inpatient maternal and neonatal mortality remained relatively constant during the study period, with persistently higher rates of both seen among black compared with white women (12.0 compared with 4.6 per 100,000 deliveries, P<.001 and 6.6 compared with 2.5 per 1,000 births, P<.001, respectively, in 2009).
    

    
  


        Conclusion:
      
    

    
      Improvements in Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality quality indicators for obstetrics are not reflected in improvements in maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality and do not explain continued racial disparities for outcomes in pregnancies in black and white women. Quality measures that are related to pregnancy outcomes are needed and these should elucidate obstetric health disparities.
Abstract
Background:
      
    

    
      Previous reports of lower triage acuity scores and longer Emergency Department (ED) wait times for African Americans compared to Caucasians had insufficient information to determine if this was due to bias or appropriately based on medical history and clinical presentation.
    

    
  


        Objective:
      
    

    
      (1) Determine if African Americans are assigned lower triage acuity scores (TAS) after adjusting for a number of demographic and clinical variables likely to affect triage scores. (2) Determine if lower TAS translate into clinically significant longer wait times to assignment to a treatment area.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      This was a retrospective matched cohort design analysis of de-identified data extracted from the ED electronic medical record system, which included demographic and clinical information, as well as TAS, and ED process times. Triage scores were assigned using a 5-point scale (ESI), with 1 being most urgent and 5 being least urgent. Mean TAS and wait times to a treatment area for specific chief complaints were compared by race; after adjusting for age, gender, insurance status, time of day, day of week, presence of co-morbidities, and abnormal vital signs using a 1:1 matched case analysis.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      The overall mean TAS for African Americans was 2.97 vs. 2.81 for Caucasians (difference of 0.18; p<0.001), translating to a lower acuity rating. African Americans had a significantly longer wait time to a treatment area compared to case-matched Caucasians (10.9min; p<0.001), with much larger differences in wait times noted within certain specific chief complaint categories.
    

    
  


        Conclusion:
      
    

    
      Our current study supports the hypothesis that racial bias may influence the triage process.
Abstract
Background:
      
    

    
      Versus whites, blacks with diabetes have poorer control of hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), higher systolic blood pressure (SBP), and higher low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol as well as higher rates of morbidity and microvascular complications.
    

    
  


        Objective:
      
    

    
      To examine whether several mutable risk factors were more strongly associated with poor control of multiple intermediate outcomes among blacks with diabetes than among similar whites.
    

    
  


        Design:
      
    

    
      Case-control study.
    

    
  


        Subjects:
      
    

    
      A total of 764 blacks and whites with diabetes receiving care within 8 managed care health plans.
    

    
  


        Measures:
      
    

    
      Cases were patients with poor control of at least 2 of 3 intermediate outcomes (HbA1c > or =8.0%, SBP > or =140 mmHg, LDL cholesterol > or =130 mg/dL) and controls were patients with good control of all 3 (HbA1c <8.0%, SBP <140 mmHg, LDL cholesterol <130 mg/dL). In multivariate analyses, we determined whether each of several potentially mutable risk factors, including depression, poor adherence to medications, low self-efficacy for reducing cardiovascular risk, and poor patient-provider communication, predicted case or control status.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      Among blacks but not whites, in multivariate analyses depression (odds ratio: 2.28; 95% confidence interval: 1.09-4.75) and having missed medication doses (odds ratio: 1.96; 95% confidence interval: 1.01-3.81) were associated with greater odds of being a case rather than a control. None of the other risk factors were associated for either blacks or whites.
    

    
  


        Conclusions:
      
    

    
      Depression and missing medication doses are more strongly associated with poor diabetes control among blacks than in whites. These 2 risk factors may represent important targets for patient-level interventions to address racial disparities in diabetes outcomes.
Abstract
Flexible transparent electrodes are in significant demand in applications including solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and touch panels. The combination of high optical transparency and high electrical conductivity, however, sets a stringent requirement on electrodes based on metallic materials. To obtain practical sheet resistances, the visible transmittance of the electrodes in previous studies is typically lower than the transparent substrates the electrode structures are built on, namely, the transmittance relative to the substrate is <100%. Here, we demonstrate a flexible dielectric-metal-dielectric-based electrode with ~88.4% absolute transmittance, even higher than the ~88.1% transmittance of the polymer substrate, which results in a relative transmittance of ~100.3%. This non-trivial performance is achieved by leveraging an optimized dielectric-metal-dielectric structure guided by analytical and quantitative principles described in this work, and is attributed to an ultra-thin and ultra-smooth copper-doped silver film with low optical loss and low sheet resistance.
Introduction
Transparent electrodes are widely used in photovoltaics (PVs)1,2, light-emitting diodes (LEDs)3,4,5, touch panels6,7, and other optoelectronic devices. Indium tin oxide (ITO) is the conventional selection for the transparent electrode because of its high visible transmittance and electrical conductivity. However, the low abundance of the indium element on earth is a limiting factor of this material. In addition, its applications in emerging flexible optoelectronic devices are significantly hindered by both the poor mechanical flexibility and the high annealing temperature needed to reduce its resistivity8. Graphene9,10, carbon nanotubes (CNTs)11,12, and conductive polymers13 have been investigated to replace ITO. Unfortunately, their limited conductivity and high cost of mass-production remains a challenge in large-area applications. To overcome these limitations, transparent electrodes employing metal networks have been proposed14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23. Although these novel structures exhibit decent optical and electrical performance and can also be scaled up easily via different roll-to-roll (R2R) techniques24,25, the extruded or non-uniform surfaces may cause shorting problems when being used in LED and PV devices14. In addition, the high optical haze resulting from the scattering of the nanowires and mesh patterns is undesired in high-resolution displays14. In recent years, dielectric–metal–dielectric (DMD)-based transparent electrodes have been noted as potential alternatives. In this type of electrode, a thin metallic film is sandwiched between two antireflection dielectrics to induce high transparency. They feature high transparency and conductivity, low haze, excellent flexibility, facile fabrication, and great compatibility with different substrates2,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37. The trade-off between electrical conductivity and optical transmittance has been a major challenge for metallic-material-based transparent electrodes. To achieve a practical conductivity (e.g., sheet resistance (Rs) < 20 Ω sq−1), the absolute visible transmittance of previously reported metallic-material-based transparent electrodes, including both metal network and DMD structures, is typically lower than that of the substrate itself, which has been taken for granted without serious questioning.Therefore, we are motivated to conduct a rigorous investigation and explore the limit of transmittance at a sufficiently low sheet resistance suitable for practical applications. In this work, we demonstrate a DMD-based transparent electrode with ~88.4% absolute transmittance averaged over the entire visible spectrum (400–700 nm) on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) polymeric substrate, which surpasses the transmittance of the substrate itself (~88.1%), leading to a relative transmittance >100%. This counter-intuitive, yet achievable performance is obtained by (i) quantitative design principles that are generalized in this work, particularly, analytic expression of the optimal bottom dielectric thickness and analytical result showing that different materials should be used for the two dielectrics, (ii) the use of an ultra-thin (~6.5 nm thick) and ultra-smooth (roughness < 1 nm) copper-doped silver (Cu-doped Ag) film providing low optical loss and high electrical conductivity at the same time. The proposed design principles and electrode structures have resolved the problems faced by other existing transparent electrodes and may have the potential to replace traditional ITO counterparts for flexible optoelectronics, thus facilitating high-performance flexible displays and optoelectronic devices.
Results
Strategy to achieve relative transmittance surpassing 100%Relative transmittance, Tr, is defined as the ratio of the absolute transmittance of the structure where a transparent substrate is coated with a metallic electrode, TD (see Fig. 1a), to the absolute transmittance of the bare substrate, TS (Fig. 1b):$$T_{\mathrm{r}} = \frac{{T_{\mathrm{D}}}}{{T_{\mathrm{S}}}} \approx \frac{{1 - \left( {R_1 + A} \right) - R_2}}{{1 - R_2 - R_2}}.$$
                    (1)
                where R1 is the reflection at the top side of DMD and A is the absorption of the metallic film, and R2 is the reflection at the substrate/air interface. For simplicity, the multiple round-trip reflections between the front and bottom surfaces of the substrate are ignored due to the negligible reflection intensity at both interfaces. Intuitively, Tr is thought to be smaller than 100% because a metallic electrode is usually reflective. However, in this section, we will provide guidelines built around the antireflection principles to reduce R1 and A using the DMD structure, and show that with optimized design (R1 + A) can be made smaller than the single side reflection of the substrate, R2, leading to relative transmittance surpassing 100%.Fig. 1: The definition of relative transmission. a Transparent substrate coated with a DMD structure. b Bare substrate.Full size imageAs shown in Fig. 2a, seven parameters (the refractive index, n2, and thickness, d2, of the transparent Dielectric 1, the refractive index, n3, extinction coefficient, κ3, and thickness, d3, of the metallic film, and the refractive index, n4, and thickness, d4, of the transparent Dielectric 2) should all be considered in order to optimize the transmittance over a broad spectrum in the visible, which makes it challenging to provide quantitative design guidelines33,34,35. Our design strategy is to maximize the transmittance for the condition where the metallic film is thick enough to achieve a practical sheet resistance; and thus, this strategy enables the synergistic combination of high optical transmittance and high electrical conductivity of DMD-based transparent electrodes.Fig. 2: Theoretical design of a DMD electrode.a Design parameters and reflection waves at various interfaces of a DMD transparent electrode. b Phasor diagram of reflection waves. c An ideal DMD and its parameters. d The calculated values of the left and right terms in Eq. (9) when using 24 nm TiO2 and 9 nm Ag as Dielectric 2 and the metallic layer, respectively, in the DMD structure, showing that Eq. (9) is well satisfied across the entire visible range. e Optimal averaged transmittance of the DMD electrode across the visible range (400–700 nm) dependent on the thickness of Dielectric 2. Here, TiO2 and 9 nm Ag are used as the bottom dielectric layer and the middle metallic layer, respectively. Each optimal transmittance value at a fixed TiO2 thickness is found out by sweeping the refractive index (n2) and the thickness (d2) of Dielectric 1.Full size imageAs a first step in the design process, a suitable material is selected for the sandwiched metallic layer by considering its (i) electrical conductivity; (ii) light absorption property in the visible range. Among all metals, silver (Ag), copper (Cu), and gold (Au) exhibit the lowest intrinsic electrical resistivity. The absorption of light by the metallic film in a DMD structure is expressed as$$A\left( {\lambda _0} \right) = \frac{{4\pi n_3\kappa _3}}{{\lambda _0}}\frac{{{\int}_0^{d_3} {\left| {E\left( z \right)} \right|^2{\mathrm{d}}z} }}{{\left| {E_0} \right|^2}},$$
                    (2)
                where E(z) is the electric field in the metallic film, E0 is the incident electric field and λ0 is the free-space wavelength. With a given thickness of the metallic layer, a metal with a small (nk) should be chosen for low absorption and high transmittance. Among Ag, Cu, and Au, Ag (n = 0.13 and k = 3.17 at 550 nm wavelength38) offers the lowest (nk) in the visible range, and is therefore, employed as the metallic layer in this study. Considering the small real part refractive index of Ag, n3 = 0 is reasonably assumed for the rest of this section for simplicity.In the next step, the thickness and the refractive index of Dielectric 2 are determined. To reduce the reflection loss at the top surface, the sum of two vectors shown in Fig. 2a should be designed to cancel r12, which is the complex reflection coefficient at the interface (1–2 interface) between the air (n1 = 1) and Dielectric 1 (\(r_{pq} = ( {\widetilde n_p{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{cos}}{\kern 1pt} \theta _p - \widetilde n_q{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{cos}}{\kern 1pt} \theta _q} )/( {\widetilde n_p{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{cos}}{\kern 1pt} \theta _p + \widetilde n_q{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{cos}}{\kern 1pt} \theta _q} )\) is the reflection coefficient at p–q interface for TE polarization where \(\widetilde n_{p(q)} = n_{p(q)} + {\mathrm{i}}\kappa _{p(q)}\) is the complex refractive index of layer p(q) and \(\theta _{p(q)}\) is the direction of wave propagation in the corresponding layer). The first vector is r23 with a phase shift acquired from the wave propagation in Dielectric 1. The second is r3,45 with a magnitude attenuation resulting from the propagation in the metallic film and with a phase shift due to the propagation in Dielectric 1. r3,45 is the total reflection coefficient at 3–4 interface (where the light reflected from the interface between 4 and 5 is taken into account), and can be expressed as$$r_{3,45} = \frac{{r_{34} + r_{45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_4d_4} \right)}}{{1 + r_{34}r_{45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_4d_4} \right)}}.$$
                    (3)
                In order to cancel out each other yielding R1 = 0, the trajectory of these three vectors should be a triangle or they should be aligned in the way as shown in Fig. 2b, therefore$$\left| {r_{3,45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }{\mathrm{i}}\kappa _3d_3} \right){\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| \ge \left| {r_{23}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| - \left| {r_{12}} \right|.$$
                    (4)
                Since n3 = 0 as we assumed,$$\left| {r_{23}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| = 1 > \left| {r_{12}} \right|,$$
                    (5)
                $$\left| {r_{23}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| = 1 > \left| {r_{3,45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }{\mathrm{i}}\kappa _3d_3} \right){\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{i}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right|,$$
                    (6)
                Thus, the right term in Eq. (4) represents the minimum value of the left term, which is achieved when the three vectors are aligned in the way as shown in Fig. 2b. In this case, we have$$\left| {r_{3,45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }{\mathrm{i}}\kappa _3d_3} \right){\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| = \left| {r_{23}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| - \left| {r_{12}} \right|,$$
                    (7)
                When the left term in Eq. (4) is smaller than this minimum value, the reflection cannot be completely suppressed.Since the left term in Eq. (4) decreases with increasing metallic film thickness (d3), |r3,45| should be designed to achieve its maximum value so that Eq. (4) can be satisfied for maximum metallic film thickness to achieve high electrical conductivity. To maximize |r3,45|, r34, and r45 should interfere constructively with each other so that$$\psi _{{\mathrm{prop}}} + \psi _{45} - \psi _{34} = 0,$$
                    (8)
                where ψ34 is the phase angle of r34, representing the phase shift due to the reflection at 3–4 interface, and ψ45 is the phase angle of r45, representing the reflection phase shift at 4–5 interface. n4 > n5 (shown later) gives ψ45 = 0. ψprop = 4πn4d4/λ is the propagation phase shift picked up when the wave is propagating in Dielectric 2. Then we get$$\psi _{34} = \frac{{4{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_4d_4.$$
                    (9)
                Since |r3,45| increases with n4 (see Supplementary Fig. 1), materials of high refractive index should be used as Dielectric 2 to achieve the maximum value of |r3,45| and its thickness can be calculated using Eq. (9). It is interesting to notice that \(\psi _{34} = {\mathrm{arctan}}{\kern 1pt} \left[ {2\kappa _3n_4/\left( {\kappa _3^2 - n_4^2} \right)} \right]\) decreases with wavelength due to the increase of κ3 with the wavelength for Ag, and the value of 4πn4d4/λ also decreases with the wavelength. Therefore, Eq. (9) can be potentially self-fulfilled over a broad spectrum, resulting in broadband high transmittance.Finally, the refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 are suitably selected for the optimal transmittance. The phasor diagram in Fig. 2b also gives$$\psi _{23} - \psi _{3,45} = {\mathrm{\pi }},$$
                    (10)
                $$\psi _{23} + \frac{{4{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2 - \psi _{12} = {\mathrm{\pi }}.$$
                    (11)
                Substituting ψ12 = π into Eq. (11) gives$$\psi _{23} + \frac{{4{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2 = 0.$$
                    (12)
                4πn2d2/λ decreases with the wavelength and \(\psi _{23} = {\mathrm{arctan}}{\kern 1pt} \left[ {2\kappa _3n_2/\left( {\kappa _3^2 - n_2^2} \right)} \right]\) also decreases with the wavelength because κ3 increases with the wavelength for Ag. Unlike Eq. (9), Eq. (12) cannot be satisfied over a broad spectrum. Thus, to achieve broadband high transmittance, we need to sweep the refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 within a small range to find out the optimal value. Since the refractive index of typical dielectrics are between ~1.38 (magnesium fluoride, MgF2) and ~2.6 (titanium dioxide, TiO2), the required efforts are significantly reduced compared to the case where the refractive indices and thicknesses of all the three D–M–D layers need to be optimized.Now, we summarize the design procedure for highly transparent DMD electrodes. Step 1 (select n3, κ3, and d3): choose a low-loss and highly conductive metallic film for the DMD layer (in most cases, use Ag). The metallic film thickness is designed to achieve the electrical conductivity required in practical applications. It is worth noting that higher overall transmittance can be achieved by using a thinner metallic film. Step 2 (select n4): use high refractive index materials for Dielectric 2. The larger n4 is used, the higher overall transmittance can be obtained. Step 3 (determine d4): the thickness of Dielectric 2 is calculated using Eq. (9). Step 4 (design n2 and d2): optimize the refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 within a small range to achieve the optimal broadband transmittance.Proof of conceptFirst, we use the results for an ideal DMD structure at a single wavelength (Fig. 2c) reported in a previous study39 to verify the design guidance provided in Eqs. (9), (10), and (12). According to ref. 39, an ideal DMD can be achieved at a selected wavelength for n1 = n5 = 1, n3 = 0, n2 = n4 = κ3, and d2 = d4 = λ/(8κ3). Substituting n4 = κ3 into Eq. (9) gives d4 = λ/(8κ3), substituting n2 = κ3 into Eq. (12) gives d2 = λ/(8κ3), and substituting n4 = κ3 into Eq. (10) gives n2 = n4, all of which are perfectly consistent with the conclusions obtained in ref. 39.In realistic cases, the substrate cannot be air (i.e., n5 ≠ n1) and the refractive indices of common dielectrics are usually much smaller than the extinction coefficients of metals in the visible range (i.e., n4 « κ3). This implies that different materials are required for Dielectrics 1 and 2 in a realistic DMD structure targeting optimal broadband transparency, i.e., n2 ≠ n4. However, the same material was used for Dielectrics 1 and 2 in most of the previous studies (more than 70 published works28), which means those results are not optimal in terms of optical transmittance and indicates the necessity of providing quantitative guidelines in order to obtain optimized DMD electrode designs.Next, the optical performance of a DMD electrode on a common optical substrate, PET, is designed based on our proposed guidelines. The flexible PET substrate exhibits an averaged absolute transmittance of ~88.0% from 400 to 700 nm as shown in Supplementary Fig. 2. A 9-nm-thick Ag film is employed as the middle metallic layer and a TiO2 film with recorded-high n4 = 2.6 reported in ref. 27 is used for Dielectric 2. At the center wavelength of the visible range (i.e., 550 nm), ψ34 is calculated as 1.37, which leads to Dielectric 2 thickness d4 = 24 nm according to Eq. (9). As displayed in Fig. 2d, Eq. (9) is satisfied over the entire visible spectrum at d4 = 24 nm because both the left (ψ34) and right (4πn4d4/λ) terms of the equation decreases with the wavelength, which is consistent with our prediction in the above discussion. As summarized in Fig. 2e, a more straightforward way to find out the optimal d4 value at which the DMD structure presents the highest averaged transmittance in the visible range (400–700 nm) is to sweep d4 within a range (e.g., from 10 to 50 nm) and obtain the best transmittance at each d4 value by sweeping the refractive index (n2) and the thickness (d2) of Dielectric 1. As seen from the plot, the highest averaged absolute transmittance of ~89.8% is achieved at d4 = 24 nm, which agrees perfectly with the calculated results using Eq. (9) and thereby validates the accuracy of our proposed method. Correspondingly, the refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 are n2 = 1.7 and d2 = 63 nm, respectively, when the highest transmittance is achieved at d4 = 24 nm. The absolute transmittance and reflectance spectra of the optimized structure, i.e., PET substrate/24 nm TiO2/9 nm Ag/63 nm Dielectric 1, spanning the entire visible range is provided in Supplementary Fig. 3. This n2 can be realized by Al2O3 film fabricated using common deposition methods. The relative transmittance of the optimized DMD electrode Tr is ~102.0% compared to the simulated transmittance (~88.0%) of the PET substrate, which indicates that our proposed design procedure effectively guarantees the optimal optical performance of the DMD structure and a relative transmittance >100% is achievable with suitable material selection and structure design.Experimental demonstrationsBased on the previous analysis, high transparency can be achieved by suppressing the metal absorption loss with thin Ag films. However, large surface roughness is an unavoidable issue for physical-vapor-deposited (evaporated or sputtered) ultra-thin (<20 nm) Ag films due to Ag atom’s intrinsic three-dimensional (3D) Volmer–Weber growth mode40. As an example, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of an evaporated 15 nm Ag film can be as large as 6 nm41. Such an issue will affect the film conductivity and induce additional scattering loss, thereby impairing both electrical and optical performance of the DMD electrodes.We recently demonstrated a novel approach to achieve ultra-thin (down to 6 nm) and ultra-smooth (RMS roughness < 1 nm) Ag film by doping a metallic element (e.g., Aluminum, Copper, Titanium, or Chromium) during Ag deposition (as illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 4)2,5,29,42. In this work, we choose Cu-doped Ag as the metallic layer as this film offers the lowest optical loss among different doped Ag films5. The deposition rates of Cu and Ag were chosen as 0.19 and 11.09 Å s−1, respectively, which corresponds to ~2% Cu atomic concentration. The added Cu atoms effectively suppress the 3D island formation of the Ag atoms during film deposition and promote an early-stage formation of ultra-thin (<10 nm) Ag films. An atomic force microscopy (AFM) image showing details of a 6.5-nm-thick Cu-doped Ag film deposited on a fused silica substrate is displayed in Fig. 3a. The RMS roughness of the film is measured to be ~0.47 nm, which is more than 10 times lower than that of pure Ag at a similar thickness reported in previous works2,5,41. A 3D view of the AFM scan is further provided in Supplementary Fig. 5 to show the surface morphology and roughness of the ultrathin Cu-doped Ag film.Fig. 3: Characterizations of a Cu-doped Ag thin film.a Atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterizations of a Cu-doped Ag thin film. The scale bar is 100 nm. b Measured relative permittivity (ε = ε1 + iε2) values as a function of free-space wavelength of Cu-doped Ag and pure Ag. The shaded region refers to the visible range (400–700 nm), over which our DMD electrode is optimized.Full size imageAs a direct representation of the light absorption property of a film, the imaginary part (ε2) of the measured permittivity (ε = ε1 + iε2 = (n + iκ)2) of the 6.5-nm-thick Cu-doped Ag (Fig. 3b) is very close to that of pure Ag in the visible range (400–700 nm), which indicates the low optical loss of the ultrathin Cu-doped Ag film. Here, a 20 nm-thick pure Ag film was sputter-deposited for the calibration and the refractive indices of both Cu-doped Ag and pure Ag films were characterized using the spectroscopic ellipsometry. In addition, the sheet resistance of this thin Cu-doped Ag film was measured as ~18.6 Ω sq−1, showing the high conductivity of the ultrathin Cu-doped Ag film.Next, a DMD-based transparent electrode is constructed employing this 6.5-nm-thick Cu-doped Ag. Here, ~50-μm-thick PET film, which exhibits excellent mechanical flexibility, is used as the substrate. Zinc oxide (ZnO) is selected as Dielectric 2 due to its high refractive index (n ~ 2.0) and negligible optical loss in the visible range (ZnO is the highest refractive index material achievable in our group). The refractive indices of PET, ZnO, and Cu-doped Ag across the whole visible wavelength range are provided in Supplementary Fig. 6. The thickness (d4) of Dielectric 2 is calculated as ~24 nm with Eq. (9) considering n4 ~ 2.05 and ñ3 ~ 0.19 + 3.39i at 550 nm wavelength. As shown in Fig. 4a, the interesting compensation between the left (ψ34) and right (4πn4d4/λ) sides of Eq. (9) spanning 400–700 nm is also effectively verified in this case. Thus, 24 nm ZnO is an optimal selection not only for a single wavelength (550 nm) but also for the entire visible range. As the last step, the refractive index and the thickness of the top dielectric (Dielectric 1) is swept from 1.3 to 2.6 and from 1 to 100 nm with a step of 0.05 and 1 nm, respectively, to find out the optimal combination for the highest averaged absolute transmittance across the 400–700 nm wavelength range. Figure 4b shows that n2 = 1.65 and d2 = 56 nm for the optimal condition and this n2 is close to the refractive index of Al2O3. By applying the measured refractive index of Al2O3 (Supplementary Fig. 6), d2 was re-optimized and is still equal to 56 nm.Fig. 4: Experimental demonstration of the designed DMD electrode.a The calculated values of the left and right terms in Eq. (9) when using 24 nm ZnO and 6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag as Dielectric 2 and the metallic layer, respectively, in the DMD structure. It shows Eq. (9) is well satisfied across the entire visible range. b Averaged absolute visible transmittance (%) of the DMD electrode dependent on the refractive index and the thickness of the top dielectric (Dielectric 1) when Dielectric 2 and the metallic layer are selected as 24 nm ZnO and 6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag, respectively. c Calculated (red solid curve) and measured (blue dashed curve) absolute transmittance from 400 to 700 nm of the designed DMD transparent electrode, showing great consistency with each other. The representative measured spectrum with an averaged transmittance of ~88.4% is taken from the measurement results of 15 samples. As a comparison, one representative transmittance spectrum of the bare PET substrate with the averaged transmittance of ~88.1% is provided to show how the optical performance of the optimized DMD electrode gets improved. Inset presents the configuration of the designed DMD electrode, i.e., PET substrate/24 nm ZnO/6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag/56 nm Al2O3. d A photograph of the fabricated flexible electrode, showing high transparent and neutral appearance.Full size imageAs illustrated in the inset in Fig. 4c, the final configuration of the DMD transparent electrode is determined as PET substrate/24 nm ZnO/6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag/56 nm Al2O3. The measured and simulated optical spectra of the designed electrode are presented in Fig. 4c, showing great consistency with each other. The averaged absolute transmittances across 400–700 nm calculated from experimental and theoretical results are ~(88.4 ± 0.1)% and ~88.4%, respectively. Figure 4c clearly shows that the transmittance of the DMD electrode is higher than the absolute transmittance of the bare PET substrate (~(88.1 ± 0.4)% from the measurement) with the optical transmittance from 416 to 607 nm effectively enhanced with the two antireflection dielectrics. Here, the cited uncertainties above represent one standard deviation of the measured data. The experimental averaged transmittances of the DMD electrode and the PET substrate are calculated with the measurement results of 15 samples. Detailed data can be found in Supplementary Figs. 2 and 7. In contrast to all the results reported in previous works, the relative transmittance of our proposed DMD electrode surpasses 100% (Tr ~ 100.3% based on the measurement data) as its optical loss (~11.6%) resulting from the stack reflection and absorption (=100%−transmittance) is well suppressed below the ~11.9% optical loss of the bare PET substrate (Supplementary Fig. 2). The angular performance of the DMD electrode is further investigated in Supplementary Fig. 8, which shows that high transmittance >75% is maintained up to 60° angle of incidence. A photograph of the fabricated flexible DMD structure on the PET substrate is displayed in Fig. 4d, which clearly shows the high transparency.It is worthwhile noting that even higher transmittance can be achieved by using a bottom dielectric of higher refractive index than that of ZnO, such as TiO2 (whose refractive index is about 2.6 in the visible range27,43,44). In this case, the thickness of the high-index TiO2 layer is determined as d4 = 22 nm using Eq. (9). The refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 are optimized as n2 = 1.6 and d2 = 72 nm, respectively, by sweeping n2 and d2 within a broad range. The optimal structure ‘PET substrate/22 nm TiO2/6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag/72 nm Dielectric 1’ gives out an averaged absolute transmittance of 89.6% across 400–700 nm, which corresponds to a relative transmittance of ~101.8% as presented in Supplementary Fig. 9.Finally, we discuss the functionality of our designed DMD electrode and other material options depending on the intended applications. Firstly, the use of the insulating Al2O3 layer will make the proposed DMD structure an excellent candidate for the transparent heat mirror28, that can be used for window defrosting or deicing applications. Secondly, to use the DMD structure as an electrode in optoelectronic devices, the Al2O3 layer can be replaced by other dielectric materials featuring a similar refractive index that can also function as an effective electron/hole transport layer. Possible candidates include ZnO sol–gel films1, which are commonly used as electron transport layers in solar cells and organic LEDs (OLEDs). Due to its porous structure, the refractive index is much lower than that of a dense ZnO film prepared by vacuum-deposition methods and is very close to the ideal refractive index (n2 = 1.65) required in our design (Supplementary Fig. 10). Notably, our proposed design principles are not limited to treating the ambient as air, in Supplementary Information we show that they are also applicable when designing a DMD electrode used in a solar cell, as an example of optoelectronic devices (see Supplementary Fig. 11 for more details). Thirdly, the dielectric layers (ZnO and Al2O3) also play a critical role in protecting the ultrathin metallic film from degradation. As presented in Supplementary Fig. 12, the DMD electrode on the PET substrate has survived the accelerated test under high temperature and humidity (85 °C, 85% relative humidity), showing ~12.6% change of the sheet resistance after 120 h test, while the sheet resistance of the ultrathin Cu-doped Ag without any protections increases quickly to infinity under the same test condition after 8 h.
Discussion
Relative transmittance higher than 100% was achieved in this work by the integration of a novel Cu-doped Ag film into an optimized DMD structure. This Cu-doped Ag film features ultra-thin thickness (~6.5 nm thick), ultra-smooth morphology (roughness < 1 nm), low optical loss, and high electrical conductivity (sheet resistance ~18.6 Ω sq−1), and was fabricated using a room-temperature deposition method. The optimized DMD structure was designed by quantitative principles that were generalized for the first time in this work. We experimentally demonstrated that the flexible DMD-based electrode, although not optimal, has 88.4% absolute averaged transmittance over the visible spectrum, which is higher than 88.1% transmittance of its PET substrate. This study provides an exciting pathway to address the major challenge faced by existing flexible transparent electrodes and to replace traditional ITO counterparts, thus facilitating high-performance flexible optoelectronic devices.
Methods
Film depositionMaterials used in this work were all deposited by sputtering (LAB 18, Kurt J. Lesker Co.). Cu-doped Ag films were deposited by DC co-sputtering from Cu and Ag targets with 4.5 mTorr argon (Ar) pressure. The optimized deposition rates of Cu and Ag were 0.19 and 11.09 Å s−1. Pure Ag was deposited by DC sputtering for 12.4 Å s−1 and 4.5 mTorr condition. ZnO and Al2O3 films were deposited by RF sputtering with 4.5 and 3.0 mTorr Ar pressure, respectively.Material and optical characterizationsAll optical simulations were performed using the transfer matrix method. The refractive indices and thicknesses of materials and transmission spectra of electrodes were measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry method (M-2000, J. A. Woollam Inc.). The reflection spectra of the fabricated electrodes were measured by a thin-film measurement instrument (F20, Filmetrics) integrated with a spectrometer and light source. The sheet resistances were measured using a four-point probe method (FPP-5000, Miller Design & Equipment). The surface morphology of Cu-doped Ag films was characterized by tapping mode atomic force microscopy (Dimension Icon AFM, Bruker Corporation).
Abstract
Purpose:
      
    

    
      Health providers' implicit racial bias negatively affects communication and patient reactions to many medical interactions. However, its effects on racially discordant oncology interactions are largely unknown. Thus, we examined whether oncologist implicit racial bias has similar effects in oncology interactions. We further investigated whether oncologist implicit bias negatively affects patients' perceptions of recommended treatments (i.e., degree of confidence, expected difficulty). We predicted oncologist implicit bias would negatively affect communication, patient reactions to interactions, and, indirectly, patient perceptions of recommended treatments.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      Participants were 18 non-black medical oncologists and 112 black patients. Oncologists completed an implicit racial bias measure several weeks before video-recorded treatment discussions with new patients. Observers rated oncologist communication and recorded interaction length of time and amount of time oncologists and patients spoke. Following interactions, patients answered questions about oncologists' patient-centeredness and difficulty remembering contents of the interaction, distress, trust, and treatment perceptions.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      As predicted, oncologists higher in implicit racial bias had shorter interactions, and patients and observers rated these oncologists' communication as less patient-centered and supportive. Higher implicit bias also was associated with more patient difficulty remembering contents of the interaction. In addition, oncologist implicit bias indirectly predicted less patient confidence in recommended treatments, and greater perceived difficulty completing them, through its impact on oncologists' communication (as rated by both patients and observers).
    

    
  


        Conclusion:
      
    

    
      Oncologist implicit racial bias is negatively associated with oncologist communication, patients' reactions to racially discordant oncology interactions, and patient perceptions of recommended treatments. These perceptions could subsequently directly affect patient-treatment decisions. Thus, implicit racial bias is a likely source of racial treatment disparities and must be addressed in oncology training and practice.
Abstract
Objective:
      
    

    
      To determine the household and community characteristics most closely associated with variation in COVID-19 incidence on American Indian reservations in the lower 48 states.
    

    
  


        Design:
      
    

    
      Multivariate analysis with population weights.
    

    
  


        Setting:
      
    

    
      Two hundred eighty-seven American Indian Reservations and tribal homelands (in Oklahoma) and, as of April 10, 2020, 861 COVID-19 cases on these reservation lands.
    

    
  


        Main outcome measures:
      
    

    
      The relationship between rate per 1000 individuals of publicly reported COVID-19 cases at the tribal reservation and/or community level and average household characteristics from the 2018 5-Year American Community Survey records.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      By April 10, 2020, in regression analysis, COVID-19 cases were more likely by the proportion of homes lacking indoor plumbing (10.83, P = .001) and were less likely according to the percentage of reservation households that were English-only (-2.43, P = .03). Household overcrowding measures were not statistically significant in this analysis (-6.40, P = .326).
    

    
  


        Conclusions:
      
    

    
      Failure to account for the lack of complete indoor plumbing and access to potable water in a pandemic may be an important determinant of the increased incidence of COVID-19 cases. Access to relevant information that is communicated in the language spoken by many reservation residents may play a key role in the spread of COVID-19 in some tribal communities. Household overcrowding does not appear to be associated with COVID-19 infections in our data at the current time. Previous studies have identified household plumbing and overcrowding, and language, as potential pandemic and disease infection risk factors. These risk factors persist. Funding investments in tribal public health and household infrastructure, as delineated in treaties and other agreements, are necessary to protect American Indian communities.
Abstract
With the ever-increasing availability of whole-genome sequences, machine-learning approaches can be used as an alternative to traditional alignment-based methods for identifying new antimicrobial-resistance genes. Such approaches are especially helpful when pathogens cannot be cultured in the lab. In previous work, we proposed a game-theory-based feature evaluation algorithm. When using the protein characteristics identified by this algorithm, called ‘features’ in machine learning, our model accurately identified antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genes in Gram-negative bacteria. Here we extend our study to Gram-positive bacteria showing that coupling game-theory-identified features with machine learning achieved classification accuracies between 87% and 90% for genes encoding resistance to the antibiotics bacitracin and vancomycin. Importantly, we present a standalone software tool that implements the game-theory algorithm and machine-learning model used in these studies.
Introduction
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) refers to a property of bacteria when they become less susceptible to an antimicrobial agent1,2,3,4. Bacteria can gain AMR by overexpressing or duplicating available genes, undergoing chromosomal mutation, or obtaining resistance genes from other bacteria by means of horizontal gene transfer1, 5. According to a recently released report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), at least 2.8 million people in the United States are infected every year by antimicrobial-resistant organisms, and these infections result in more than 35,000 deaths6. Also, according to a recently released report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2.4 million deaths are predicted in Europe, North America, and Australia in the next 30 years due to antimicrobial-resistant infections, and such infections could cause up to US$3.5 billion in additional health care costs per year7, 8. As AMR becomes a threat worldwide, both economically and to public health9,10,11,12,13, there is an urgent need to develop a preclinical tool for efficient prediction of AMR.One conventional strategy for identifying genetically-encoded mechanisms for AMR involves sequence assembly14,15,16,17 and read-based techniques18,19,20 that map sequence data directly to reference databases. Although these methods perform well for known and highly conserved AMR genes, they may produce an unacceptable number of false positives (genes predicted to encode resistance when they do not) for highly dissimilar sequences as was demonstrated previously for Gram-negative bacteria21. Machine-learning techniques can be applied as an alternative solution for predicting putative AMR genes. Rather than using sequence similarity, a machine-learning model detects features, i.e., characteristics of a protein sequence, that are unique to AMR genes. Several machine-learning methods have been proposed to identify novel AMR genes from metagenomic and pan-genome data12, 22, 23, but these methods used a small number of genetic features for predictions. Moreover, these approaches did not use a feature-selection strategy to remove irrelevant and redundant features that might compromise the accuracy of a machine-learning model.We recently introduced a game-theory-based feature selection approach (“game theoretic dynamic weighting based feature evaluation”, or GTDWFE) predicated on the supposition that a single feature might provide limited predictive value, but that it might contribute to form a strong coalition when used with other features21. We applied our feature selection approach in Gram-negative bacteria and obtained prediction accuracies ranging from 93% to 99% for prediction of genes that encode resistance to acetyltransferase (aac), \(\beta \)-lactamase (bla), and dihydrofolate reductase (dfr). In our current study, we test the GTDWFE algorithm with data from Gram-positive bacteria. We then combine the results for both studies and introduce “Prediction of Antimicrobial Resistance via Game Theory” (PARGT), a software program with a graphical-user interface (GUI) that is designed to identify antimicrobial-resistance genes for both Gram-positive and -negative bacteria.A major objective was to develop a software tool with a simple and intuitive GUI that is capable of extracting protein features without the need for manual curation and then use these features to identify putative AMR genes. PARGT integrates all of the tools and scripts required to identify protein features and to automatically generate feature subsets obtained via the GTDWFE algorithm. PARGT can be used with the Windows, Linux, or macOS, operating systems, and it provides options for predicting bac and van resistance genes in any Gram-positive bacteria and aac, bla, and dfr resistance genes in any Gram-negative bacteria. Users can test a single sequence or an entire genome for these genes. In addition, PARGT allows users to add newly confirmed AMR or non-AMR sequences to the training set as well as to reset the training data back to the original training set downloaded with the tool.
Results
Validation of PARGTWe validated the GTDWFE algorithm for feature selection as implemented previously21. In our earlier work, we considered the AMR (positive) and non-AMR (negative) amino-acid sequences of aac, bla, and dfr for Acinetobacter, Klebsiella, Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Escherichia as training datasets and tested our trained support vector machine (SVM)24, 25 machine-learning model with sequences from Pseudomonas, Vibrio, and Enterobacter. The combination of GTDWFE and SVM resulted in correct classification rates of 93%, 99%, and 97% for aac, bla, and dfr, respectively. This demonstrated that our approach was promising and that the GTDWFE algorithm is capable of identifying the most relevant, non-redundant, and interdependent features necessary for accurate prediction.In this paper we consider validation of our GTDWFE model for AMR proteins in Gram-positive bacteria. We use the unique AMR and non-AMR sequences available for bac and van from the Gram-positive bacteria Clostridium spp. and Enterococcus spp. as the training datasets for our SVM model. These training datasets are used to generate the best feature subsets by means of the GTDWFE approach. The training datasets contain 25 and 52 AMR (positive) examples for bac and van, respectively. A total of 52 non-AMR examples are considered as negative samples for each of the training datasets. In the GTDWFE approach, we select features based on the relevance, non-redundancy, and interdependency values of all features. For this analysis, we need to set an interdependent group size \(\delta \) to measure the interdependency between features, where \(\delta \) is used in the computation of the Banzhaf power index26 and indicates the size of each feature group. We selected a value of \(\delta =3\) based on previous work21 where we found that an interdependent group size of 3 was sufficient to identify best feature subsets from training datasets. We then test our trained model with known AMR and non-AMR samples from Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria. The test datasets contain 6 and 9 AMR (positive) sequences for bac and van, respectively, and 14 non-AMR (negative) sequences are used for each test dataset.Table 1 Predicted bac AMR sequences for Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria using the GTDWFE algorithm.Full size table
Table 2 Predicted van AMR sequences for Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria using the GTDWFE algorithm.Full size table
Tables 1 and 2 list the predicted bac and van AMR sequences from our test datasets, respectively. In each table, we provide the NCBI accession number27 for each protein sequence together with its name, and we note whether an AMR protein was correctly classified as AMR (true positive) or a non-AMR sequence was incorrectly classified as AMR (false positive). The GTDWFE algorithm successfully identified all six bac AMR genes (true positives). However, it missclassified 2 of the 14 non-AMR sequences as AMR (false positives). Therefore, the number of true positives, true negatives (negatives accurately classified), false positives, and false negatives (positives classified as negatives) for bac are 6, 12, 2, and 0, respectively, and the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for bac are 100%, 86%, and 90%, respectively. As shown in Table 2 for van, 8 of 9 AMR sequences were correctly classified as AMR (true positives) whereas 2 of 14 non-AMR sequences were classified as AMR (false positives). Therefore, the number of true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives for van are 8, 12, 2, and 1, respectively, and the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for van are 89%, 86%, and 87%, respectively. Note that the two tables contain one hypothetical protein and one putative uncharacterized protein. We have categorized these two proteins as false positives because they were identified as essential (non-AMR) genes in the Pathosystems Resource Integration Center (PATRIC)28, 29. However, it is quite possible that PARGT correctly identified them as AMR proteins given the number of annotation errors in public databases30. CDC71755 is from a Staphylococcus organism identified from a metagenome sequence, and EUJ19660 is from a Listeria aquatica organism obtained from an environmental water sample.Performance comparison with BLASTp and Kalign toolsWe also compared the performance of our GTDWFE algorithm with BLASTp (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins) and Kalign31 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/kalign/) results using default parameter settings. The outcomes shown in Supplementary Table S1 are the percent identities for bac AMR and non-AMR samples from Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria with respect to the bac AMR samples of Clostridium and Enterococcus. A percent identity for BLASTp and Kalign as low as 38.13% and 46.19%, respectively, are needed to identify all the bac AMR sequences; however, these low percent identities lead to 6 and 3 of 14 false positives for BLASTp and Kalign, respectively, in which non-AMR sequences are miscategorized. Therefore, the low percent identities for BLASTp and Kalign required to identify all AMR sequences increase the number of false positives for a set of diverse AMR sequences. In Supplementary Table S2 we show that the performances of BLASTp and Kalign when identifying van AMR sequences are actually better than that of the GTDWFE algorithm. This is due to the very high similarity (>98.5% identity) between the training AMR and test AMR datasets for van. When training and test sets share high similarity, BLASTp and Kalign are guaranteed to give good results. However, as in the case of bac for which the training and test AMR data similarity ranges between 38.13% and 41.01%, BLASTp does not perform well. For Kalign, the similarity ranges between 46.19% and 49.17% so that it performs better than BLASTp. However, the GTDWFE algorithm will outperform both BLASTp and Kalign because it does not use sequence similarity but rather protein features for prediction. BLASTp and Kalign do not predict; they match sequence similarity.
Discussion
In this work, we implemented a software package PARGT and extended our earlier work of identifying AMR genes in Gram-negative to Gram-positive bacteria. PARGT integrates the required software tools and scripts needed to generate all protein features automatically, and it performs predictions on user-inputted sequences. Moreover, users can update PARGT by including their own known AMR and non-AMR sequences to train the machine-learning model to potentially improve prediction accuracy. As our previous work described the experimental results for Gram-negative bacteria, in this paper we only included prediction results for Gram-positive bacteria. Simulation results showed that PARGT can predict AMR sequences for Gram-positive bacteria with accuracy ranging from 87% to 90%. PARGT gave better results for bac due to the diversity of sequences available, but BLASTp and Kalign exhibited better performance in the case of van because of the high similarity of sequences. To generate evolutionary and secondary structure features, we used the Uniprot database (containing 538,585 FASTA sequences) as our reference database for relatively fast execution; however, more accurate values for these features can be obtained using large-scale protein databases such as UniRef90 or UniRef100 (http://www.uniprot.org/help/uniref) as target/reference databases. Note, however, that there is a trade-off between accuracy and computational time when using a large-scale reference database to generate features. A parallel version of PARGT would reduce the execution time of the tool for and ameliorate the use of large-scale reference databases.
Methods
GTDWFE algorithm for feature selectionFeature collection, feature extraction, calculation of feature values, and feature selection using the GTDWFE algorithm are explained in detail in previous works21, 32. Briefly, a total of 621D candidate features were collected by means of a thorough literature search, where D stands for dimension (some features are single values, i.e., 1D, while others are vector values, e.g., 20D for the 20 different amino acids). We extracted all 621D features from both our positive (AMR) and negative (non-AMR) datasets and calculated their values. The GTDWFE algorithm was then used to select features for use in our machine-learning model. The GTDWFE selects the best feature at each iteration based on the relevance, non-redundancy, and interdependency values of all features. Initially, the weights of all features are the same i.e., 1. The relevance of a feature to the target class (AMR or non-AMR) and the distance of the feature to other features are calculated using Pearson’s correlation coefficient and the Tanimoto coefficient, respectively. These calculations are performed for all features, and the feature with the highest summation of relevance and distance is chosen as the initial selected feature. The Banzhaf power index26 is then calculated to estimate the interdependency between the selected feature and the remaining features. We measure the contribution of each feature when it forms a group with other features, and the conditional mutual information is calculated to find the Banzhaf power index of the features. The weight of each remaining feature is updated by adding the product of the current weight and the Banzhaf power index to the feature selected previously. In other words, at each step, we readjust the weight of the remaining features dynamically based on the features selected in earlier steps. Thus, the weight of a candidate feature actually corresponds to the interdependence values with the earlier selected features. The feature with the highest summation of relevance and distance values multiplied by the revised weight is chosen as the next selected feature. This process is repeated until the desired number of features has been reached.Machine-learning algorithmAfter identifying the best feature subset for use with our classifier by means of the GTDWFE algorithm, we trained an SVM machine-learning model using this feature subset. This binary classifier was then used for prediction. As was true for our previous work, in PARGT we tuned the SVM using the training datasets and chose the best SVM model to predict the AMR proteins in the test sequences. We considered 10-fold cross validation to tune the SVM model. The SVM model with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel and a cost value of 4 was identified as the best model for both bac and van training datasets. For the SVM, the RBF is used as a function in the kernel trick to implicitly transform the original space of the data to a high-dimensional space to make the data samples linearly separable, and the cost parameter is used to regulate the classification error.Figure 1The components of PARGT. Components outlined by dotted lines indicate additional training samples supplied by a user.Full size image
Overview of PARGT softwarePARGT is an open-source software package designed and implemented for predicting antimicrobial resistance genes in bacteria. PARGT is written using both Python 3 and R. R scripts were written to identify physicochemical and secondary structure features and for machine-learning modeling, and Python 3 was used to run the R scripts, to generate position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) features, and to implement the GUI. PARGT weight the importance of protein features based on their contributions during classification. All the required bioinformatics tools33,34,35,36,37,38,39 and scripts necessary to generate the protein features required in our machine-learning model are included in PARGT. PARGT uses the best feature subset identified by our GTDWFE algorithm to make predictions. It allows users to add new AMR and non-AMR sequences to the training datasets, and the software automatically updates the machine-learning model with the additional sequences, potentially resulting in an increase in the accuracy of the model. To minimize execution time, PARGT uses the UniProt database containing 538,585 protein sequences as a reference database, rather than a larger database, for generating PSSM and secondary structure features.Architecture of PARGTFigures 1 and 2 depict the architecture and GUI for PARGT, respectively. PARGT allows a user to input a set of known AMR and non-AMR sequences to use in the training dataset, generating all required feature values for these sequences automatically. As shown in Fig. 1, the 20D amino acid composition feature vector, 168D feature vector based on the composition, transition and distribution (CTD) model40, 41, 400D feature vector based on the PSSM, and 33D feature vector based on the secondary structure sequence and secondary structure probability matrix are generated from the input protein sequences. Then the best feature subset is constructed using our GTDWFE feature selection algorithm. An SVM is used as the machine-learning model that is trained using the selected feature set. Recall that the SVM model used for PARGT is automatically tuned during the training phase. Finally, the trained SVM model is applied to predict AMR sequences from the test dataset.As shown in Fig. 2, PARGT provides the option of predicting aac, bla, and dfr resistance genes for Gram-negative bacteria and bac and van resistance genes for Gram-positive bacteria. A user must select the appropriate option for predicting AMR from the GUI menu and also supply the test file for the set of protein sequences in FASTA format that they wish to have classified as AMR or non-AMR. PARGT automatically computes all the required feature values for the test sequences, and it provides an output file containing the set of predicted AMR sequences for the user’s test file. If a user wants to include new known AMR or non-AMR sequences to augment the training datasets, PARGT provides an option to do so for the five above-mentioned resistance classes. In addition, it provides the option of restoring the original training datasets in case a user decides they prefer to use them or or else wants to compare predictions using two different sets of training data.Figure 2Illustration of the PARGT GUI with its pop-up menu.Full size image
DatasetsWe retrieved protein sequences for AMR genes from the Antibiotic Resistance Genes Database (ARDB)42, and non-AMR sequences were obtained from the PATRIC28, 29. Initially, we gathered 124 bac and 374 van AMR sequences for the Gram-positive bacteria Clostridium spp. and Enterococcus spp., and we randomly chose 52 essential protein sequences to use as non-AMR sequences. As many of the protein sequences were duplicates, CD-HIT43, 44 was applied to find unique sequences. A sequence identity of \(\ge \) 90% was used as a threshold for removing duplicate sequences. After eliminating redundant protein sequences, our final counts were 25 bac and 52 van AMR sequences; none of the 52 non-AMR sequences were duplicates. We used this dataset to train our machine-learning model. In addition to the training dataset, we also gathered 102 bac and 22 van AMR sequences and 14 non-AMR sequences for the Gram-positive bacteria Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., and Listeria spp. from the data sources indicated above. We again applied CD-HIT to this dataset, and after the removal of duplicate sequences, 6 bac and 9 van AMR sequences and 14 non-AMR sequences remained. We used these as our test dataset to measure the accuracy of the classifier. The sequence identity of protein sequences could be as low as 10%. After validating our GTDWFE algorithm with the training and test sequences for the bac and van AMR classes, we again trained our classifier, but we used the sequences from all five bacterial genera, i.e., both training and test sequences, to potentially increase the accuracy of PARGT. The same retraining was also performed for our Gram-negative bacteria.
Abstract
The density structure of the interstellar medium determines where stars form and release energy, momentum and heavy elements, driving galaxy evolution1,2,3,4. Density variations are seeded and amplified by gas motion, but the exact nature of this motion is unknown across spatial scales and galactic environments5. Although dense star-forming gas probably emerges from a combination of instabilities6,7, convergent flows8 and turbulence9, establishing the precise origin is challenging because it requires gas motion to be quantified over many orders of magnitude in spatial scale. Here we measure10,11,12 the motion of molecular gas in the Milky Way and in nearby galaxy NGC 4321, assembling observations that span a spatial dynamic range 10−1–103 pc. We detect ubiquitous velocity fluctuations across all spatial scales and galactic environments. Statistical analysis of these fluctuations indicates how star-forming gas is assembled. We discover oscillatory gas flows with wavelengths ranging from 0.3–400 pc. These flows are coupled to regularly spaced density enhancements that probably form via gravitational instabilities13,14. We also identify stochastic and scale-free velocity and density fluctuations, consistent with the structure generated in turbulent flows9. Our results demonstrate that the structure of the interstellar medium cannot be considered in isolation. Instead, its formation and evolution are controlled by nested, interdependent flows of matter covering many orders of magnitude in spatial scale.