
Background|BackgroundThe Bergamo province, which is extensively affected by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) epidemic, is a natural observatory of virus manifestations in the general population. In the past month we recorded an outbreak of Kawasaki disease; we aimed to evaluate incidence and features of patients with Kawasaki-like disease diagnosed during the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic.MethodsAll patients diagnosed with a Kawasaki-like disease at our centre in the past 5 years were divided according to symptomatic presentation before (group 1) or after (group 2) the beginning of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic. Kawasaki- like presentations were managed as Kawasaki disease according to the American Heart Association indications. Kawasaki disease shock syndrome (KDSS) was defined by presence of circulatory dysfunction, and macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) by the Paediatric Rheumatology International Trials Organisation criteria. Current or previous infection was sought by reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR in nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs, and by serological qualitative test detecting SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG, respectively.FindingsGroup 1 comprised 19 patients (seven boys, 12 girls; aged 3·0 years [SD 2·5]) diagnosed between Jan 1, 2015, and Feb 17, 2020. Group 2 included ten patients (seven boys, three girls; aged 7·5 years [SD 3·5]) diagnosed between Feb 18 and April 20, 2020; eight of ten were positive for IgG or IgM, or both. The two groups differed in disease incidence (group 1 vs group 2, 0·3 vs ten per month), mean age (3·0 vs 7·5 years), cardiac involvement (two of 19 vs six of ten), KDSS (zero of 19 vs five of ten), MAS (zero of 19 vs five of ten), and need for adjunctive steroid treatment (three of 19 vs eight of ten; all p<0·01).InterpretationIn the past month we found a 30-fold increased incidence of Kawasaki-like disease. Children diagnosed after the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic began showed evidence of immune response to the virus, were older, had a higher rate of cardiac involvement, and features of MAS. The SARS-CoV-2 epidemic was associated with high incidence of a severe form of Kawasaki disease. A similar outbreak of Kawasaki-like disease is expected in countries involved in the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic.FundingNone.
Methods|The Bergamo province, which is extensively affected by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) epidemic, is a natural observatory of virus manifestations in the general population. In the past month we recorded an outbreak of Kawasaki disease; we aimed to evaluate incidence and features of patients with Kawasaki-like disease diagnosed during the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic.
Findings|All patients diagnosed with a Kawasaki-like disease at our centre in the past 5 years were divided according to symptomatic presentation before (group 1) or after (group 2) the beginning of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic. Kawasaki- like presentations were managed as Kawasaki disease according to the American Heart Association indications. Kawasaki disease shock syndrome (KDSS) was defined by presence of circulatory dysfunction, and macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) by the Paediatric Rheumatology International Trials Organisation criteria. Current or previous infection was sought by reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR in nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs, and by serological qualitative test detecting SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG, respectively.
Interpretation|Group 1 comprised 19 patients (seven boys, 12 girls; aged 3·0 years [SD 2·5]) diagnosed between Jan 1, 2015, and Feb 17, 2020. Group 2 included ten patients (seven boys, three girls; aged 7·5 years [SD 3·5]) diagnosed between Feb 18 and April 20, 2020; eight of ten were positive for IgG or IgM, or both. The two groups differed in disease incidence (group 1 vs group 2, 0·3 vs ten per month), mean age (3·0 vs 7·5 years), cardiac involvement (two of 19 vs six of ten), KDSS (zero of 19 vs five of ten), MAS (zero of 19 vs five of ten), and need for adjunctive steroid treatment (three of 19 vs eight of ten; all p<0·01).
Funding|In the past month we found a 30-fold increased incidence of Kawasaki-like disease. Children diagnosed after the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic began showed evidence of immune response to the virus, were older, had a higher rate of cardiac involvement, and features of MAS. The SARS-CoV-2 epidemic was associated with high incidence of a severe form of Kawasaki disease. A similar outbreak of Kawasaki-like disease is expected in countries involved in the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic.
Publication History|End-stage organ failure is estimated to affect more than six million people worldwide.1Levin A Tonelli M Bonventre J et al.Global kidney health 2017 and beyond: a roadmap for closing gaps in care, research, and policy.Lancet. 2017; 390: 1888-1917Summary
Full Text
Full Text PDF
PubMed
Scopus (210)
Google Scholar In 2018, transplant systems across the world enabled around 150 000 patients to benefit from a kidney, heart, lung, liver, or other solid organ—a number far less than the demand. According to data from WHO, more than 1 500 000 people live with a transplanted organ worldwide. In the USA, approximately 40 000 patients receive an organ transplant every year, but 120 000 patients remain on a waiting list for transplantation, with 7600 individuals dying annually while waiting for an organ transplant. In Europe and many other countries, patients are affected by a similar scarcity of organs and high death rates while on the waiting list for transplantation.
Identification|As nations adjust to new realities driven by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, many health-care providers, institutions, and patients are concerned about the potential effect that COVID-19 will have on organ donation and transplantation. One concern is that transplant recipients might have greater susceptibility to infection and increased viral burden.2American Society of TransplantationCOVID-19 information.https://www.myast.org/covid-19-informationDate: April 17, 2020Date accessed: April 28, 2020Google Scholar A second concern is that hospitals will not have the resources in terms of staff and equipment to care for recipients after transplantation, who typically need intensive care and multispecialty management.
Copyright|Because of the overwhelming health-care system burden of the COVID-19 pandemic, a pronounced negative effect on worldwide organ donation and transplantation is anticipated but has not been measured. Our objective was to quantify the contemporary effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on organ donation and transplantation in France and the USA.
ScienceDirect|We did nationwide analyses using data on COVID-19 diagnoses from Public Health France and the Center for System Science and Engineering.3Xu B Kraemer MUG on behalf of the Open COVID-19 Data Curation GroupOpen access epidemiological data from the COVID-19 outbreak.Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;  (published online Feb 19.)https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30119-5Summary
Full Text
Full Text PDF
Scopus (26)
Google Scholar Organ procurement and transplantation data were obtained from two federal agencies, the National Organ Procurement Agency in France and the United Network for Organ Sharing in the USA.4United Network for Organ SharingTransplant trends.https://unos.org/data/transplant-trends/Date: April 27, 2020Date accessed: April 28, 2020Google Scholar Organ transplantations were counted using mean 5 days moving averages, with stratified analyses done for kidney, liver, heart, and lung.
Abstract|ObjectiveIn this systematic review, we will discuss the evidence on the occurrence of central nervous system (CNS) involvement and neurological manifestations in patients with COVID-19.MethodsMEDLINE (accessed from PubMed) and Scopus from December 01, 2019 to March 26, 2020 were systematically searched for related published articles. In both electronic databases, the following search strategy was implemented and these key words (in the title/abstract) were used: “COVID 19” OR “coronavirus” AND “brain” OR “CNS” OR “neurologic”.ResultsThrough the search strategy, we could identify two articles about neurological involvement by COVID-19. One of these publications was a narrative review and the other one was a viewpoint. However, the authors scanned the reference lists of the included studies and could identify multiple references. One study, specifically investigated the neurological manifestations of COVID-19 and could document CNS manifestations in 25% of the patients. Most of the studies investigated the manifestations of COVID-19 in general.ConclusionWhile neurological manifestations of COVID-19 have not been studied appropriately, it is highly likely that some of these patients, particularly those who suffer from a severe illness, have CNS involvement and neurological manifestations. Precise and targeted documentation of neurological symptoms, detailed clinical, neurological, and electrophysiological investigations of the patients, attempts to isolate SARS-CoV-2 from cerebrospinal fluid, and autopsies of the COVID-19 victims may clarify the role played by this virus in causing neurological manifestations.Keywords: CNS, Coronavirus, COVID-19, Neurological, Seizure
1. Introduction|Coronavirus is one of the major viruses that primarily targets the human respiratory system, but it also has neuroinvasive capabilities and can spread from the respiratory tract to the central nervous system (CNS). Previous epidemics or pandemics of coronaviruses include the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2002 and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2012. The most recent pandemic of coronavirus infection is coronavirus disease (COVID-19) that is caused by SARS-CoV2 [1,2]. The symptoms of COVID-19 infection usually appear after an incubation period of about five days. The most common symptoms of COVID-19 illness are fever, cough, and fatigue; other symptoms include headache, hemoptysis, and dyspnea, among others. In the most severe cases, patients may develop pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute cardiac problems, and multiorgan failure [1]. The first cases of COVID-19 were reported in December 2019 [1]; however, when we searched the MEDLINE (accessed from PubMed), from December 01, 2019 to March 26, 2020, with the key word “COVID 19”, surprisingly 1655 articles were yielded. This shows that COVID-19 pandemic is of great global public health concern.Coronavirus infections have been associated with neurological manifestations (e.g., febrile seizures, convulsions, change in mental status, and encephalitis) [2,3]. Neurotropic and neuroinvasive capabilities of coronaviruses have been described in humans. Upon nasal infection, coronavirus enters the CNS through the olfactory bulb, causing inflammation and demyelination [3]. In this systematic review, we will discuss the evidence on the occurrence of CNS involvement and neurological manifestations in patients with COVID-19.
2. Methods|The report of this systematic review was made according to the recommendations of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement [4,5] (Fig. 1
). The review protocol was not previously registered. MEDLINE (accessed from PubMed) and Scopus from December 01, 2019 to March 26, 2020 were systematically searched for related published articles. In both electronic databases, the following search strategy was implemented and these key words (in the title/abstract) were used: “COVID 19” OR “coronavirus” AND “brain” OR “CNS” OR “neurologic”. Articles written in English were all included in this search. To ensure literature saturation, the authors scanned the reference lists of the included studies or relevant reviews identified through the search. Both authors participated through each phase of the review independently (screening, eligibility, and inclusion). They independently screened the titles and abstracts yielded by the search against the inclusion criteria. They obtained full reports for all titles that appeared to meet the inclusion criteria or where there was any uncertainty. Authors screened the full text reports and decided whether these meet the inclusion criteria. They resolved any disagreement through discussions. Neither of the authors were blind to the journal titles or to the study authors or institutions.Open in a separate windowFig. 1Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram of the study.The following data were extracted from the included studies: study authors, study designs, main results, and limitations. The methodological quality of the included studies was assessed by the authors. The class of evidence was defined following the American Academy of Neurology criteria for classification of evidence in studies of causation (Appendix 1) [6].2.1. Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient consentsThe Shiraz University of Medical Sciences Institutional Review Board approved this systematic review.
3. Results|Through the search strategy, we could identify two articles about neurological involvement by COVID-19 (Table 1, Table 2
) [7,8]. One of these publications was a narrative review [7] and the other one was a viewpoint [8]. However, to ensure literature saturation, the authors scanned the reference lists of the included studies and could identify multiple references [9–14]. Table 3
shows the summary of these studies on the CNS manifestations of COVID-19. One study, specifically investigated the neurological manifestations of COVID-19 and could document CNS manifestations in 25% of the patients [9]. However, the authors did not perform electroencephalography (EEG) or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. Another retrospective study investigated acute cerebrovascular disease occurrence following COVID-19 [10]. Other studies investigated the manifestations of COVID-19 in general; they did not specifically pay attention to the neurological manifestations [[11], [12], [13], [14]].Table 1The search keywords included “COVID 19” and those in the first column of the table.Medline (PubMed)Scopus (Article title, Abstract, Keywords)KeywordsPrimary hintsRelevant articlesPrimary hintsRelevant articlesBrain17021 (duplicate)Neurologic1111 (duplicate)CNS1100Total19232 (2 duplicates)Open in a separate windowTable 2The search keywords included “coronavirus” and those in the first column of the table.Medline (PubMed)Scopus (Article title, Abstract, Keywords)KeywordsPrimary hintsRelevant articlesPrimary hintsRelevant articlesBrain222 (2 duplicates)91 (duplicate)Neurologic11 (duplicate)41 (duplicate)CNS41 (duplicate)30Total274 (4 duplicates)162 (2 duplicates)Open in a separate windowTable 3Neurological manifestations of COVID-19.Author/yearMethodsNeurological manifestationsLimitationsLevel of evidenceMao/ 2020 [9]Retrospective case series of 214 admitted patientsCNS manifestations: in 25%. Headache (13%), dizziness (17%), impaired consciousness (8%), acute cerebrovascular problems (3%), ataxia (0.5), and seizures (0.5%)No CSF analysis; no EEG study; no clear definition of symptomsIIILi/ 2020 [10]Retrospective case series of 221 admitted patients5% developed acute ischemic stroke, 0.5% had cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, and 0.5% had cerebral hemorrhageOther related neurological manifestations were not studied.IIHuang/ 2020 [11]Prospective study of 41 admitted patientsHeadache in 8%Not specifically studied neurological manifestations. No CSF or EEG studiesIYang/ 2020 [12]Retrospective study of 52 critically ill adult patientsHeadache in 6%Not specifically studied neurological manifestations. No CSF or EEG studiesIIWang/ 2020 [13]Retrospective case series of the 138 hospitalized patientsDizziness in 9%; Headache in 7%Not specifically studied neurological manifestations. No CSF or EEG studiesIIChen/ 2020 [14]Retrospective case series of the 99 hospitalized patientsConfusion in 9%; Headache in 8%Not specifically studied neurological manifestations. No CSF or EEG studiesIIOpen in a separate windowCNS: central nervous system; CSF: cerebrospinal fluid; EEG: electroencephalography.
4. Discussion|In this study, we observed that the evidence on the CNS involvement and neurological manifestations of COVID-19 is scarce and of low quality. However, the only study that specifically investigated this issue documented that one-quarter of the hospitalized patients with a confirmed diagnosis of severe acute respiratory syndrome from coronavirus 2 infection had some manifestations of CNS involvement [9]. Some patients with COVID-19 may show nonspecific neurological symptoms, such as confusion and headache. A few patients with COVID-19 showed more specific neurological manifestations, such as seizure or cerebrovascular problems (Table 3). Furthermore, neuroinvasion of SARS-CoV2 may partially explain why some patients develop respiratory failure, while others do not [7].Most coronaviruses share similar viral structures and infection pathways; hence, the pathomechanisms previously found for other coronaviruses may also be applicable for SARS-CoV2. Human coronaviruses are not always confined to the respiratory tract; they can invade the CNS. A growing body of evidence shows that neuroinvasion and neurotropism is a common feature of human coronaviruses [2]. Infection with SARS-CoV has been associated with neurological manifestations. In the reported patients with SARS-CoV, CSF tested positive for the virus [15,16]. In one study of 183 hospitalized children with clinically suspected acute encephalitis, 22 (12%) had coronavirus infection (type was not specified) by detection of anti-CoV IgM [17]. In a study of 70 patients with MERS-CoV infection, altered mental status was reported in 26% of the patients and 9% of the people had seizure [18]. Therefore, it is very likely to observe neurological manifestations in patients with COVID-19 if we carefully and specifically look for them.Finally, patients with severe COVID-19 may have hypoxia, multiorgan failure, and metabolic and electrolyte derangements, and may require sophisticated medication regimens and therapeutic interventions. Hence, it is plausible to expect clinical or subclinical acute symptomatic seizures and status epilepticus to happen in these patients. Impaired mental status has been reported in patients with severe COVID-19 [9, 14]; but, this manifestation has never been studied appropriately in previous studies (Table 3). When visiting a patient who is in a critical medical condition and has a change in mental status, one should make sure that nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) is not a part of the clinical scenario. The diagnosis of NCSE is frequently overlooked, with patients in critical medical conditions having other serious problems. It is necessary to perform continuous EEG monitoring in any patient with a critical medical condition, who has a change in mental status, in order to make a timely diagnosis of NCSE [19]. Salzburg Consensus Criteria for Non-Convulsive Status Epilepticus is a helpful guide to make a diagnosis of NCSE in critically ill patients [20].
5. Conclusion|While neurological manifestations of COVID-19 have not been studied appropriately yet, it is highly likely that some of these patients, particularly those who suffer from a severe illness, have CNS involvement and neurological manifestations. Precise and targeted documentation of the neurological symptoms (e.g., headache, dizziness, etc.) and signs (e.g., change in mental status, meningeal signs, etc.), detailed clinical, neurological, and electrophysiological investigations (e.g., EEG) of the patients (particularly those with a change in mental status), attempts to isolate SARS-CoV-2 from CSF, and autopsies of the COVID-19 victims may clarify the roles played by this virus in causing neurological manifestations.
Acknowledgment|
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences supported this study.DisclosuresAli A. Asadi-Pooya, M.D.: Honoraria from Cobel Daruo, RaymandRad and Tekaje; Royalty: Oxford University Press (Book publication). Leila Simani, PhD.: none.
Abstract|WHO declared SARS-CoV-2 a global pandemic. The present aim was to propose an hypothesis that there is a potential association between mean levels of vitamin D in various countries with cases and mortality caused by COVID-19. The mean levels of vitamin D for 20 European countries and morbidity and mortality caused by COVID-19 were acquired. Negative correlations between mean levels of vitamin D (average 56 mmol/L, STDEV 10.61) in each country and the number of COVID-19 cases/1 M (mean 295.95, STDEV 298.7, and mortality/1 M (mean 5.96, STDEV 15.13) were observed. Vitamin D levels are severely low in the aging population especially in Spain, Italy and Switzerland. This is also the most vulnerable group of the population in relation to COVID-19. It should be advisable to perform dedicated studies about vitamin D levels in COVID-19 patients with different degrees of disease severity.Keywords: COVID-19, SARS-CoV2, Vitamin D, Cholecalciferol, Calcitriol
Background/aims|WHO declared COVID-19 caused by the virus SARS-CoV-2 a global pandemic. Little is known about the potential protective factors. In the case of COVID-19 we should delineate the protective factors in anti-infective agents that might protect against infection and factors that improve the outcome once the infection has been produced.Previous observational studies report independent associations between low serum concentration of 25-hydroxyvitanim D and susceptibility to acute respiratory tract infections [1]. In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 25 randomised controlled studies, Martineau et al. has described that vitamin D protected against acute respiratory tract infection overall [2]. In a review of the literature, regarding the possible role of vitamin D in the prevention of influenza virus infection, Gruber-Bzura noticed that the data generate controversies and doubts [3].Calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3) exerts pronounced impacts on ACE2/Ang(1–7)/MasR axis with enhanced expression of ACE2 [4]. ACE-2 is the host cell receptor responsible for mediating infection by SARS-CoV-2. Starting from this, it might suggest a higher risk of infection. However, this has not been shown to date and previous studies identified associations between higher levels of ACE2 and better coronavirus disease health outcomes. In the lung, ACE2 was shown to protect against acute lung injury [5].We hypothesize that vitamin D may play a protective role for COVID-19.The primary aims of this study are to assess if there is any association between the mean levels of vitamin D in various countries and the mortality caused by COVID-19. The secondary aim was to identify if there is any association between the mean vitamin D levels in various countries and the number of cases of COVID-19.
Materials and methods|To test this hypothesis and to limit confounding bias (latitude, etc.), we focused on European countries only. We searched the literature for the mean levels of vitamin D in each country [3]. We searched the number of cases of COVID-19/1 M population in each of the countries and mortality caused by this disease/1 M population (8th April, 19.00GMT) (Table ​(Table1)1) [4]. Statistical analyses were carried out using the Pearson Correlation Coefficient Calculator.Table 1Mean level of vitamin D, cases of COVID-19/1 M and deaths caused by COVID-19 (8th April 2020)CountriesVit D(25)HD mean (nmol/L)Cases of COVID-19/1 MDeaths caused by COVID-19/1 MIsland57473618Norway65112319Sweden73.583468Finland67.74497Denmark6593338UK47.4895105Ireland56.4123048Netherlands59.51199131Belgium49.32019193Germany50.1130925France601671167Switzerland462686103Italy502306292Spain42.53137314Estonia5189318Czech Republic62.54889Slovakia81.51250.4Hungary60.6936Turkey51.845310Portugal39128937Open in a separate window
Results|We have observed a negative correlation between levels of mean vitamin D (average 56.79 nmol/L, STDEV 10.61) and number of cases of COVID-19/1 M population in each country [average 1393.4, STDEV 1129.984, r(20) = − 0.4435; p value = 0.050], and between the mean vitamin D levels and the number of deaths caused by COVID-19/1 M (Fig. 1) [average 80.42, STDEV 94.61, r(20)-value = − 0.4378; p value = 0.05) (Table ​(Table11).Open in a separate windowFig. 1Mean vitamin D levels per courtry versus COVID-19 cases and mortality/1M population
Discussions|We have identified a potential crude association between the mean vitamin D levels in various European countries with COVID-19 cases/1M and COVID-19 mortality.The European Calcified Tissue Society Working Group has defined severe vitamin D deficiency as a serum 25(OH)D level lower than 30 nmol/L [6].The Seneca study showed a mean serum vitamin D level of 26 nmol/L in Spain, 28 nmol/L in Italy and 45 nmol/L in the Nordic countries, in older people [6]. In Switzerland, mean vitamin D level is 23 nmol/L in nursing homes and in Italy 76% of women over 70 years of age have been found to have circulating levels below 30 nmol/L [6]. These are the countries with high number of cases of COVID-19 and the aging people is the group with the highest risk for morbidity and mortality with SARS-CoV2. Isaia et al. reported 25(OH)D circulating levels less than 12 ng/mL (30 nmol/L) in 76% of Italian women over 70 years of age, in late Winter [7].Vitamin D deficiency is a major public health problem worldwide in all age groups [8, 9] but vitamin D status deteriorates with age, above 70 years of life, due to decreased sun exposure and cutaneous synthesis [10]. It is poor in the institutionalized people, 75% of them being severely vitamin D deficient (serum 25(OH)D < 25 nmol/L) [6].The Southern European countries have lower levels of vitamin D because of decreased exposure (prefer the shade in strong sun) [10] and also as skin pigmentation decreases vitamin D synthesis [11]. Northern part of Europe’s mean levels are better as a consequence of the consumption of cod liver oil and vitamin D supplements as well as fortification of milk and milk products (Finland) [6].The crude association observed in the present study may be explained by the role of vitamin D in the prevention of COVID-19 infection or more probably by a potential protection of vitamin D from the more negative consequences of the infection.Regarding the protective role of vitamin D against infection with SARS-Cov2, we can start by looking at the effect on other respiratory infections.Martineau et al. concluded in a meta-analysis that vitamin D supplementation was safe and protective against acute respiratory tract infections. They described that patients who were severe vitamin D deficient experienced the most benefit [2].The pathology of COVID-19 involves a complex interaction between the SARS-CoV2 and the body immune system. Calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3) exerts pronounced impacts on ACE2/Ang(1–7)/MasR axis with enhanced expression of ACE2 [4]. ACE2 is the host cell receptor responsible for mediating infection by SARS-CoV-2. From this perspective it might be apparent that the risk of infection can be higher. However, vitamin D has multiple roles in the immune system that can modulate the body reaction to an infection. Abu-Amer et al. have described that vitamin D deficiency impairs the ability of macrophages to mature, to produce macrophage-specific surface antigens, to produce the lysosomal enzyme acid phosphatase, and to secrete H2O2, a function integral to their antimicrobial function [12]. This might explain, in part, why Martineau et al. have observed that vitamin D was protective in cases of hypovitaminosis [5]. Crucial in the innate immune response are the toll-like receptors which recognise molecules related to pathogens and when activated release cytokines and induce reactive oxygen species and antimicrobial peptides, cathelicins and defensins. Several of the toll-like receptors affect or are affected by vitamin D receptor induction [3].COVID-19 is caused, beside the virus virulence by the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Vitamin D has been found to modulate macrophages' response, preventing them from releasing too many inflammatory cytokines and chemokines [13]. Ciu et al. found that calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3) exerted pronounced impact on ACE2/Ang(1–7)/MasR axis with enhanced expression of ACE2, MasR and Ang(1–7) generation [4].Zhen et al. have shown that H5N1 flu infection-induced lung injury can be alleviated by the administration of recombinant human ACE2 protein [14].Kuka et al. have identified that higher levels of ACE2 are associated with better outcomes for coronavirus disease and it has been shown that in the lung, ACE2 protects against acute lung injury [5].Xie et al. investigated ACE2 expression in lungs and the effect caused by ageing and gender on its expression, in a rodent model study. The authors described that the decrease of ACE2 was relatively small between the young-adult and the middle-aged groups (25% for male and 18% for female, respectively), but the content of ACE2 decrease by 67% in older female rats and even higher, 78% in older male rats as compared to younger groups [15]. This decrease of ACE2 with age and gender seems to parallel the increase in COVID-19 mortality as well as the higher mortality in the male population.We acknowledge that this cross-sectional analysis has limitations. The number of cases/country is affected by the number of tests performed and also by the different measures taken by each country to prevent the spread of infection, and the difference in the number of infected patients in the population will also mean different levels of exposure for the population. Mortality might be a better marker of the number of cases in the population although even that can be influenced by the variations in the approach or management of the disease. However, the aim of the present study was to lay out an hypothesis to be taken forward and be investigated utilizing robust study designs.In conclusion, we found significant crude relationships between vitamin D levels and the number COVID-19 cases and especially the mortality caused by this infection. The most vulnerable group of population for COVID-19, the aging population, is also the one that has the most deficit Vitamin D levels.Vitamin D has already been shown to protect against acute respiratory infections and it was shown to be safe. It should be advisable to perform dedicated studies about vitamin D levels in COVID-19 patients with different degrees of disease severity.
Funding|No source of funding was used.
Compliance with ethical standards|Conflict of interestPetre Cristian Ilie, Simina Stefanescu and Lee Smith declare that they have no conflict of interest.Ethical statementThis study is compliant with the ethical standards.Informed consentConsidering the design of the study no informed consent was necessary.
Footnotes|Publisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Abstract|The ongoing outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has spread rapidly on a global scale. Although it is clear that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is transmitted through human respiratory droplets and direct contact, the potential for aerosol transmission is poorly understood1,2,3. Here we investigated the aerodynamic nature of SARS-CoV-2 by measuring viral RNA in aerosols in different areas of two Wuhan hospitals during the outbreak of COVID-19 in February and March 2020. The concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in aerosols that was detected in isolation wards and ventilated patient rooms was very low, but it was higher in the toilet areas used by the patients. Levels of airborne SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the most public areas was undetectable, except in two areas that were prone to crowding; this increase was possibly due to individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 in the crowd. We found that some medical staff areas initially had high concentrations of viral RNA with aerosol size distributions that showed peaks in the submicrometre and/or supermicrometre regions; however, these levels were reduced to undetectable levels after implementation of rigorous sanitization procedures. Although we have not established the infectivity of the virus detected in these hospital areas, we propose that SARS-CoV-2 may have the potential to be transmitted through aerosols. Our results indicate that room ventilation, open space, sanitization of protective apparel, and proper use and disinfection of toilet areas can effectively limit the concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in aerosols. Future work should explore the infectivity of aerosolized virus.
Main|The ongoing outbreak of COVID-19, which has been reported in 206 countries and areas, has resulted in 857,641 confirmed cases and 42,006 deaths globally as of 2 April 2020. Owing to the increasing threat caused by COVID-19 to global health, the World Health Organization (WHO) has declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic and global public health emergency. The causative pathogen of the COVID-19 outbreak has been identified as a highly infectious novel coronavirus that is referred to as SARS-CoV-24,5,6. Reported transmission pathways of SARS-CoV-2 in humans include the inhalation of virus-laden liquid droplets, close contact with infected individuals and contact with surfaces that are contaminated with SARS-CoV-21. Moreover, aerosol transmission has been suggested to be an additional, yet important pathway, on the basis of clinical observations in confined spaces2,3. There are many respiratory diseases that are spread through airborne routes, such as tuberculosis, measles and chickenpox7,8. A retrospective cohort study conducted after the SARS epidemic—which was caused by SARS-CoV—in Hong Kong in 2003 suggested that airborne spread may have had an important role in the transmission of SARS9. At present, little is known about the aerodynamic characteristics and transmission pathways of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosols; in part because of the difficulties in sampling virus-containing aerosols in real-world settings and challenges in their quantification at low concentrations.We analysed the occurrence of airborne SARS-CoV-2 and its aerosol deposition at 30 sites in two designated hospitals and public areas in Wuhan, China, and then quantified the copy counts of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosol samples using a robust droplet-digital-PCR-based detection method (ddPCR)10. The two hospitals are exclusively used for the treatments of patients with COVID-19 during the outbreak; however, each hospital has unique characteristics that serve different purposes. Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University (hereafter, Renmin Hospital) is representative of grade-A tertiary hospitals that have been designated for the treatment of patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19. By contrast, Wuchang Fangcang Field Hospital (hereafter, Fangcang Hospital) is representative of the makeshift field hospitals that were converted from indoor sports facilities or exhibition centres to quarantine and treat patients with mild symptoms. The sampling locations were classified into three categories according to their accessibility by different groups: (1) patient areas, where the patients with COVID-19 have a physical presence—these include the intensive care units, coronary care units and ward rooms inside Renmin Hospital, a toilet and staff workstations inside Fangcang Hospital; (2) medical staff areas, the workplaces in the two hospitals that are exclusively accessed by medical staff who had direct contact with the patients; and (3) public areas, venues that are open to the general public (Supplementary Table 1). Three types of aerosol samples were collected: (1) aerosol samples of total suspended particles with no upper size limit to quantify RNA concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosols; (2) aerodynamic size-segregated aerosol samples to determine the size distribution of airborne SARS-CoV-2 droplets; and (3) aerosol deposition samples to determine the deposition rate of airborne SARS-CoV-2.The existence of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosol samples was determined through the quantification of its genetic material (RNA). The concentrations of airborne SARS-CoV-2 at the different sites are shown in Table 1. In general, very low or undetectable concentrations of airborne SARS-CoV-2 were found in most of the patient areas of Renmin Hospital, suggesting that the negatively pressurized isolation and high air exchange rate inside the intensive care units, coronary care units and ward room of Renmin Hospital are very effective in limiting the airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2. The highest concentration in patient areas was observed inside a patient mobile toilet room at Fangcang Hospital (19 copies m−3), which is a temporary single toilet room of approximate 1 m2 in area without ventilation. Airborne SARS-CoV-2 may come from either the patient’s breath or the aerosolization of the virus-laden aerosol from the faeces or urine of a patient during use11,12. Although the infectivity of the virus is not known in this study, the results also relate to the findings of another study13, which found positive test results of wipe samples from room surfaces of toilets used by patients infected with SARS-CoV-2. In medical staff areas, the two sampling sites in Renmin Hospital had low concentrations of 6 copies m−3, whereas the sites in Fangcang Hospital generally had higher concentrations. In particular, the protective-apparel removal rooms (PPARs) in three different zones inside Fangcang Hospital are among the upper range of the concentrations of airborne SARS-CoV-2, ranging from 16 to 42 copies m−3 in the first round of sampling. In public areas outside the hospitals, we found that most of the sites had undetectable or very low concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 aerosols (below 3 copies m−3), except for one crowd-gathering site about 1 m from the entrance of a department store that customers frequently passed through and a site next to Renmin Hospital, through which the public including outpatients walked. Although both sites were outside buildings, it is possible that individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 in the crowd may have been the source of virus-laden aerosols during the sampling period. The results suggest that, overall, the risks of infection are low in well-ventilated or open public venues, but do reinforce the importance of avoiding crowded gatherings and implementing the early identification and diagnosis of individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 for quarantine or treatment.Table 1 RNA concentration of airborne SARS-CoV-2 at different locations in WuhanFull size tableInside a room of the intensive care unit of Renmin Hospital, the two aerosol deposition samples tested positive with an estimated deposition rate of 31 and 113 copies m−2 h−1, although the concentration of the total suspended particles in the aerosol sample inside this room of the intensive care unit was below the detection limit (Table 1). The sample with the higher deposition rate was placed in the hindrance-free corner of the room, approximately 3 m from the bed of a patient. The other sample, for which a lower number of virus copies was recorded, was placed in another corner, approximately 2 m from the bed of the patient and below medical equipment, which may have blocked the path of virus aerosols during sedimentation. Our findings, although based on a small sample size, indicate that virus-laden aerosol deposition may have a role in surface contamination and subsequent contact by susceptible people, which results in the infection of individuals with SARS-CoV-2.In general, medical staff areas had higher concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 aerosols compared with patient areas in both hospitals during the first round of sampling (17–24 February 2020) at the peak of the COVID-19 outbreak (Table 1). For sampling sites at Renmin Hospital, the air circulation in medical staff areas is isolated by design from the air circulation in the patient rooms. By contrast, in Fangcang Hospital, the non-ventilated temporary PPAR was isolated from the patient hall, in which the aerosol concentration of SARS-CoV-2 was generally low. The second round of sampling of total suspended particles in medical staff areas of Fangcang Hospital was conducted after the number of patients reduced from more than 200 to less than 100 per zone and the implementation of more rigorous and thorough sanitization measures, including more frequent spraying of chlorinated disinfectant on the floor of patient areas, additional disinfection using 3% hydrogen peroxide in the PPAR at least once a week, thoroughly spraying alcohol disinfectant on the protective apparel before taking it off and an increased operation time of indoor air purifiers. The samples from this second round showed all undetectable results (Table 1), confirming the importance of sanitization in reducing the amount of airborne SARS-CoV-2 in high-risk areas.SARS-CoV-2 aerosols were mainly found to include two size ranges, one in the submicrometre region (dp between 0.25 and 1.0 μm) and the other in supermicrometre region (dp > 2.5 μm). Aerosols in the submicrometre region were predominantly found in PPARs in zones B and C of Fangcang Hospital (Fig. 1a, b) with peak concentrations of 40 and 9 copies m−3 in the 0.25–0.5 μm and 0.5–1.0 μm range, respectively. By contrast, aerosols in the supermicrometre region were mainly observed in the PPAR of zone C of Fangcang Hospital (Fig. 1b) with concentrations of 7 copies m−3. The medical staff’s office (Fig. 1c) had more virus-laden aerosols in the supermicrometre size range, but the size distribution is flatter compared with the range in other areas. Reports on the resuspension of microorganisms from the floor, clothing and furniture have previously been noted to contribute to the generation of microbial aerosols in the built environment14. Therefore, we hypothesize that the source of the submicrometre peak is the resuspension of virus-laden aerosols from the surface of the protective apparel worn by medical staff while they are removing the equipment. The submicrometre virus-laden aerosols may originally come from the direct deposition of respiratory droplets or airborne SARS-CoV-2 from a patient onto the protective apparel as evidenced by the deposition samples (Table 1). The higher mobility owing to their smaller aerodynamic diameter facilitates the resuspension from the surface of protective apparel after gaining the initial velocity while the equipment is being removed. On the other hand, floor-deposited SARS-CoV-2 is possibly the source of supermicrometre virus-laden aerosols and was carried across different areas by medical staff. Furthermore, a recent study has experimentally demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 could maintain its biological stability in aerosols and on different surfaces for hours to days15. The submicrometre SARS-CoV-2 aerosols found in this study had a relatively longer residence time, indicating that the virus was probably still infectious during transmission.Fig. 1: Concentration of airborne SARS-CoV-2 RNA in different aerosol size bins.a, Concentration of SARS-CoV-2 in a protective-apparel removal room in zone B of Fangcang Hospital. b, Concentration of SARS-CoV-2 in a protective-apparel removal room in zone C of Fangcang Hospital. c, Concentration of SARS-CoV-2 in the medical staff’s office of Fangcang Hospital. The x axis represents the aerodynamic diameter on a logarithmic scale to cover the multiple magnitudes of measured aerosol diameters.Source DataFull size imageThis study has its inherent limitations because of the small sample size and the description of sample viral RNA instead of virus infectivity, which was imposed by restricted access to the patient and medical staff areas at the epicentre of the COVID-19 outbreak. Nonetheless, the findings of this study provide a real-world investigation of the aerodynamic characteristics of airborne SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan, where a strict quarantine and travel restrictions were implemented during the peak of the COVID-19 outbreak. The findings suggest that toilet use by patients with COVID-19 and crowd gatherings that included individuals infected by SARS-CoV-2 are non-negligible sources of airborne SARS-CoV-2, although the infectivity of the virus is not known. We also describe a transmission pathway for SARS-CoV-2 aerosols that is mediated by the surface deposition of the virus on and resuspension from protective apparel of medical staff and the floor surface. The results of this study have important implications for the prevention of infection of the public and protection of medical staff. We call for particular attention to (1) the ventilation and sterilization of toilets as a potential source for the spreading of the virus; (2) personal protection measures for the general public, such as the wearing of masks and avoidance of busy crowds to reduce the risk of exposure to airborne virus; (3) the effective sanitization of high-risk areas in the hospital to limit the transmission of airborne SARS-CoV-2 and to protect the medical staff; (4) the effectiveness of a naturally ventilated large stadium to limit the aerosol transmission of SARS-CoV-2 when converted to a field hospital for the quarantine and treatment of patients with SARS-CoV-2; and (5) surface sanitization of the apparel before the equipment is taken off to help to reduce the potential risk of infection for medical staff.
Methods|Data reportingNo statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and the investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.Sample collectionThe sampling was conducted between 17 February and 2 March 2020 in the locations in two rounds as shown in Table 1. All aerosol samples were collected on presterilized gelatin filters (Sartorius). A total of 30 aerosol samples of total suspended particles were collected on 25-mm-diameter filters loaded into styrene filter cassettes (SKC) by sampling air at a fixed flow rate of 5.0 l min−1 using a portable pump (APEX2, Casella). A total of three size-segregated aerosol samples was collected using a miniature cascade impactor (Sioutas Impactor, SKC) that separated aerosols into five ranges (>2.5 μm, 1.0–2.5 μm, 0.50–1.0 μm and 0.25–0.50 μm on 25-mm filter substrates, and 0–0.25 μm on 37-mm filters) at a flow rate of 9.0 l min−1. A total of two aerosol deposition samples was collected using 80-mm-diameter filters packed into a holder with an effective deposition area of 43.0 cm2 and the filters were placed intact on the floor in two corners of the intensive care unit room of Renmin Hospital for 7 days. Sampling durations and operation periods are described in Supplementary Table 1. All sampling instruments were located in the centre of the respective sampling area, where the sampling inlet was at a height of 1.5 m from the floor. Considering the limited experimental conditions and the small sample size, the integrity and robustness of the experiment protocol was examined extensively in the laboratory before field sampling and these results are described in Supplementary Table 2.Analytical method and data analysisAfter the collection of aerosol samples, all samples were processed immediately in the BSL-2 laboratory of Wuhan University. The 25-, 37-mm and 80-mm filter samples were dissolved in deionized water, after which TRIzol LS reagent (Invitrogen) was added to inactivate SARS-CoV-2 viruses and extract RNA according to the manufacturer’s instructions. First-strand cDNA was synthesized using the PrimeScript RT kit (TakaRa). Optimized ddPCR was used to detect the presence of SARS-CoV-2 viruses according to a previous study10. Analysis of the ddPCR data was performed using QuantaSoft software (Bio-Rad). The concentration reported by the procedure equals the number of copies of template per microlitre of the final 1× ddPCR reaction, which was normalized to copies m−3 in all of the results; therefore, the virus or viral RNA concentration in aerosol is expressed in copies m−3 throughout. A detailed protocol is provided in the Supplementary Information.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability|
All data generated and analysed during this study are included in the Article and its Supplementary Information. Source Data for Fig. 1 are provided with the paper.

Acknowledgements|This study was supported by the Special Fund for COVID-19 Research of Wuhan University. We thank Taikang Insurance Group, Beijing Taikang Yicai Foundation, Renmin Hospital and Wuchang Fangcang Hospital for their support of this work; H. Xu from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Qingdao Laoying Environmental Technology, Beijing Top Science, Shanghai Leon Scientific Instrument, Shanghai Eureka Environmental Protection Hi-tech and Sapiens Environmental Technology for their support in providing the sampling devices and technical support of this study; and C. Wang, Q. Zhang, G. Liang and Z. Song for their assistance in filter sample preparation and logistics support.
Author information|Author notesThese authors contributed equally: Yuan Liu, Zhi Ning, Yu Chen, Ming GuoAffiliationsState Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology Research Center, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, P. R. ChinaYuan Liu, Yu Chen, Ming Guo, Yingle Liu, Xinjin Liu, Ke Xu & Ke LanDivision of Environment and Sustainability, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, P. R. ChinaZhi Ning, Nirmal Kumar Gali, Li Sun & Dane WesterdahlShanghai Environmental Monitoring Center, Shanghai, P. R. ChinaYusen Duan & Qingyan FuSchool of Public Health, Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety of the Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of the Ministry of Health, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. ChinaJing Cai & Haidong KanJC School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, P. R. ChinaKin-fai HoAuthorsYuan LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarZhi NingView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarYu ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMing GuoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarYingle LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarNirmal Kumar GaliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarLi SunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarYusen DuanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJing CaiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarDane WesterdahlView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarXinjin LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKe XuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKin-fai HoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarHaidong KanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarQingyan FuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKe LanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsK.L., Y.C., Z.N., Q.F., H.K. and K.-f.H. conceptualized the study design; Yuan Liu, Y.C., M.G., Yingle Liu and K.L. collected samples; Yuan Liu, M.G. and X.L. carried out the laboratory tests; Yuan Liu, Z.N., Y.C., N.K.G., M.G., X.L. and K.L. analysed the data; Y.C., Z.N., Yuan Liu, Q.F., H.K., J.C., K.-f.H. and K.L. interpreted the results; Yuan Liu and Z.N. wrote the initial drafts of the manuscript; Yuan Liu, Z.N., Y.C. and K.L. revised the manuscript; M.G., Yingle Liu, N.K.G., L.S., Y.D., J.C., D.W., K.X., H.K. and Q.F. commented on the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Zhi Ning or Yu Chen or Kin-fai Ho or Haidong Kan or Qingyan Fu or Ke Lan.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information|Peer review information Nature thanks Linsey Marr and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information|
Supplementary InformationThis file contains Supplementary Methods, Supplementary Table 1 (Specifications of sampling sites) and Supplementary Table 2 (Cycle threshold value (Ct) of EV71 virus positive control and laboratory test air samples RT-PCR).Reporting SummaryPeer Review File
Source data|
Source Data Fig. 1
Rights and permissions|Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleLiu, Y., Ning, Z., Chen, Y. et al. Aerodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in two Wuhan hospitals.
                    Nature 582, 557–560 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3Download citationReceived: 14 March 2020Accepted: 20 April 2020Published: 27 April 2020Issue Date: 25 June 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3
Further reading|g





                  Collection of SARS-CoV-2 Virus from the Air of a Clinic within a University Student Health Care Center and Analyses of the Viral Genomic Sequence
                


John A. Lednicky, Sripriya N. Shankar, Maha A. Elbadry, Julia C. Gibson, Md. Mahbubul Alam, Caroline J. Stephenson, Arantzazu Eiguren-Fernandez, J. Glenn Morris, Carla N. Mavian, Marco Salemi, James R. Clugston & Chang-Yu Wu

Aerosol and Air Quality Research
                (2020)
              




                  COVID-19 stressors on migrant workers in Kuwait: cumulative risk considerations
                


Barrak Alahmad, Hussam Kurdi, Kyle Colonna, Janvier Gasana, Jacqueline Agnew & Mary A Fox

BMJ Global Health
                (2020)
              




                  Recognizing and controlling airborne transmission of SARS‐CoV‐2 in indoor environments
                


Joseph G. Allen & Linsey C. Marr

Indoor Air
                (2020)
              




                  Understanding the knowledge gaps between air pollution controls and health impacts including pathogen epidemic
                


Qingxin Ma, Yu Qi, Qiuli Shan, Sijin Liu & Hong He

Environmental Research
                (2020)
              




                  Infection control in dental health care during and after the SARS‐CoV‐2 outbreak
                


Catherine M. C. Volgenant, Ilona F. Persoon, Rolf A. G. Ruijter & J. J. (Hans) Soet

Oral Diseases
                (2020)
              




Comments|By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.
Abstract:|
Activated Harvey murine sarcoma virus 
         ras genes were introduced into epidermal cells in vivo by direct application of retroviruses
         to mouse skin. Subsequent treatment with the tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate
         (TPA) induced benign papillomas, some of which progressed to invasive carcinomas.
         Initiation with virus was irreversible for at least 4 months, since TPA treatment
         after this latency period produced papillomas within 4 weeks. Analysis of viral integration
         sites showed that carcinomas are clonal in origin. Both papillomas and carcinomas
         express virus-specific 
         ras mRNA and the viral form of 
         ras P21 protein. The results show that activated 
         ras genes can replace chemical carcinogens in initiation of mouse skin carcinogenesis.
         This system presents a novel approach to in vivo analysis of the biological role of
         oncogenes in epithelial tumorigenesis.
      

Abstract|The recent outbreak of coronavirus
infectious disease 2019 (COVID-19)
has gripped the world with apprehension and has evoked a scare of
epic proportion regarding its potential to spread and infect humans
worldwide. As we are in the midst of an ongoing pandemic of COVID-19,
scientists are struggling to understand how it resembles and differs
from the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV)
at the genomic and transcriptomic level. In a short time following
the outbreak, it has been shown that, similar to SARS-CoV, COVID-19
virus exploits the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor
to gain entry inside the cells. This finding raises the curiosity
of investigating the expression of ACE2 in neurological tissue and
determining the possible contribution of neurological tissue damage
to the morbidity and mortality caused by COIVD-19. Here, we investigate
the density of the expression levels of ACE2 in the CNS, the host–virus
interaction and relate it to the pathogenesis and complications seen
in the recent cases resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak. Also, we
debate the need for a model for staging COVID-19 based on neurological
tissue involvement.Keywords: Coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, ACE2 tissue distribution, host−virus
interaction, spike protein
1. The Novel COVID-19 Virus|The first reports of the viral infection attracted attention in
late December 2019 in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei, China. Later, it
was revealed that the virus responsible for causing the infections
was contagious between humans. By early January, terms like “the
new coronavirus” and “Wuhan coronavirus” were
in common use. On February 11, 2020, a taxonomic designation “severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2” (SARS-CoV-2) became
the official means to refer to the virus strain, that was previously
termed as 2019-nCoV and Wuhan coronavirus. Within a few hours on the
same day, the WHO officially renamed the disease as COVID-19.
2. The Genome of the COVID-19 Virus|The complete genome
of SARS-CoV-2 from Wuhan, China was submitted
on January 17, 2020 in the National Center for Biotechnology1 (NCBI) database, with ID NC_045512. The genome
of SARS-CoV-2 is a 29,903 bp single-stranded RNA (ss-RNA) coronavirus.
It has now been shown that the virus causing COVID-19 is a SARS-like
coronavirus that had previously been reported in bats in China.
3. Tissue Distribution of ACE2 in Human Organs
and Tissues|In order to discover the neurovirulence of SARS-CoV-2
and relate
it to neurological tissue expression of ACE2, data retrieval was done
from human protein databases. Most of the evidence of ACE2 expression
in the brain (Figure ​Figure11) comes from literature and mammalian tissue expression databases,2 which prompted us to investigate neurotropic
effects of SARS-CoV-2 and its contribution toward the morbidity and
mortality of patients with COVID-19.Open in a separate windowFigure 1Tissue distribution of ACE2 receptors
in humans. Viremia (A) disseminates
the COVID-19 virus throughout the body via the bloodstream (B). Neurotropism
may occur via circulation and/or an upper nasal trancribrial route
that enables the COVID-19 to reach the brain (C) and bind and engage
with the ACE2 receptors (D, blue). COVID-19 docks on the ACE2 via
spike protein (D, golden spikes). Shown are lungs, heart, kidneys,
intestines, brain, and testicles that are well-known to express ACE2
receptors and are possible targets of COVID-19.3.1. Evidence of the Distribution of ACE2 in the
Human BrainThe brain has been reported to express ACE2 receptors
(Figure ​Figure11A, C) that
have been detected over glial cells and neurons, which makes them
a potential target of COVID-19. Previous studies have shown the ability
of SARS-CoV to cause neuronal death in mice by invading the brain
via the nose close to the olfactory epithelium.3 The contribution of the neurotropic potential of SARS-CoV-2
in patients reported in the recent outbreak of COVID-19 remains to
be established. In the SARS-CoV infections that were reported in the
past, autopsy findings of the patients have shown strong evidence
of the presence of SARS-CoV by electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry,
and real-time reverse transcription-PCR (3). Patients with acute SARS-CoV illness have also demonstrated
the presence of the virus in cerebrospinal fluid. The role of the
blood-brain barrier in containing the virus and preventing it from
gaining access to the neural tissues needs to be further explored
in patients diagnosed with COVID-19. Recently, a study posted in medRxiv4 has reported neurological manifestations in COVID-19
in the current outbreak that involved 214 patients, of which 78 (36.4%)
patients had neurologic manifestations, which affirms our rationale
of the neurotropic potential in the COVID-19 virus. Also, a finding
published on a patient who had loss of involuntary control over breathing5 during the recent outbreak with several other
patients suffering acute respiratory failure implores healthcare professionals
and clinicians to segregate COVID-19 patients into neurologically
affected cases and those who are devoid of neurological deficits.
4. Host–Virus Interaction: How the ACE2
Receptor Is Exploited by the COVID-19 Virus to Gain Entry Inside the
Host Cells|With the mRNA encoding several other proteins,1 the COVID-19 virus, like SARS-CoV, uses a spike
protein
S1 that enables the attachment of the virion to the cell membrane
by interacting with host ACE2 receptor3,6 (Figure ​Figure11C, D). In the later study,6 it was shown that the ACE2 binding affinity of
the 2019-nCoV spike protein ectodomain was 10–20-fold higher
than that of the SARS-CoV spike protein. A BLASTp search of the COVID-19
virus (SARS-CoV-2) receptor binding domain (RBD) subdomain-1 (319th
to 591st aa) fetched a spike glycoprotein [bat coronavirus RaTG13]
and S1 protein partial [SARS coronavirus GD322] as homologs. Pairwise
sequence alignments of the three sequences show that although the
spike proteins of all three CoV are highly similar they are not identical
(Figure ​Figure22A, horizontal
arrows), which may be the reason for the higher binding affinity of
the COVID-19 spike protein to the human ACE2 receptor. Homology modeling
of SARS-CoV-2 RBD subdomain-1 (319th to 591st aa) in the SWISS-MODEL
automated server developed a template-based model of the SARS-CoV-2
spike glycoprotein with a single receptor-binding domain in the up
configuration (Figure ​Figure22A1) with 100% sequence identity. Of the other template-based models
developed, it expectedly showed a model of the structure of the SARS-CoV
spike glycoprotein, conformation 2 with about 74% sequence identity
(Figure ​Figure22B, B1), which
shows them to be structurally and evolutionarily related.Open in a separate windowFigure 2(A) Sequence
alignment of COVID-19 RBD subdomain-1 (319th to 591st)
amino acid (top row) with the bat and SARS-CoV spike protein (middle
and bottom row) that were fetched from BLASTp results of the COVID-19
virus RBD subdomain-1 (319th to 591st) amino acids. Note horizontal
arrows that show areas of contrast between the sequences. (A1) Homology
modeling of the COVID-19 virus RBD subdomain-1 (319th to 591st) amino
acid developed a template (6vsb.1. A)-based model of the COVID-19
virus spike glycoprotein. (B). Homology modeling of the COVID-19 virus
RBD subdomain-1 (319th to 591st) amino acid developed a template-(5x5b.1.A)
based model of the prefusion structure of SARS-CoV spike glycoprotein
in conformation 2 (B1) with 73.96% sequence identity. [Uniprot and
SWISS-MODEL automated server were used for sequence alignments and
development of the templates and models, respectively.]
5. A Proposed Cascade of Cerebral Involvement in
the COVID-19 Infections|The dissemination of COVID-19 in
the systemic circulation or across
the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone (Figure ​Figure11) during an early or later phase of the infection
can lead to cerebral involvement as has been reported in the past
for SARS-CoV affected patients.3 The presence
of the COVID-19 virus in the general circulation understandably enables
it to pass into the cerebral circulation (Figure ​Figure11A–C) where the sluggish movement of
the blood within the microcirculation could be one of the factors
that may facilitate the interaction of the COVID-19 virus spike protein
with ACE2 expressed in the capillary endothelium. Subsequent budding
of the viral particles from the capillary endothelium and damage to
the endothelial lining can favor viral access to the brain (Figure ​Figure11B). Once within the
milieu of the neuronal tissues, its interaction with ACE2 receptors
(Figure ​Figure11C, D) expressed
in neurons2 can initiate a cycle of viral
budding accompanied by neuronal damage without substantial inflammation
as has been seen with cases of SARS-CoV3 in the past. It is important to mention here that, long before the
proposed anticipated neuronal damages occur, the endothelial ruptures
in cerebral capillaries accompanied by bleeding within the cerebral
tissue can have fatal consequences in patients with COVID-19 infections.
The movement of the COVID-19 virus to the brain via the cribriform
plate close to the olfactory bulb can be an additional pathway that
could enable the virus to reach and affect the brain. Additionally,
the findings like an altered sense of smell or hyposmia in an uncomplicated
early stage COVID-19 patient should be investigated thoroughly for
CNS involvement.
6. Conclusions and Future Directions|Autopsies of the COVID-19 patients, detailed neurological investigation,
and attempts to isolate SARS-CoV-2 from the endothelium of cerebral
microcirculation, cerebrospinal fluid, glial cells, and neuronal tissue
can clarify the role played by this novel COVID-19 causing coronavirus
in the ongoing mortalities as has been in the recent outbreak. It
is important to mention here that although the cerebral damage may
complicate a COVID-19 infection, it appears that it is the widespread
dysregulation of homeostasis caused by pulmonary, renal, cardiac,
and circulatory damage that proves fatal in COIVD-19 patients. With
that being said, a dominant cerebral involvement alone with the potential
of causing cerebral edema in COVID-19 can take a lead in causing death
long before systemic homeostatic dysregulation sets in. Access of
the COVID-19 virus to the brain via the transcribrial route, as described
previously for other CNS targeting pathogens,7 could have been the case in a recently reported patient with hyposmia
and the cases of acute respiratory failure in COVID-19,5 which needs to be further elucidated by isolating
the SARS-CoV-2 virus from the zones that are in proximity to the olfactory
bulb. It is expected that the differences in the sequence of spike
proteins between COVID-19 virus and SARS-CoV (Figure ​Figure22A) will enable scientists to identify epitopes
in COVID-19 virus for the development of monoclonal antibodies against
this virus. With the recent COVID-19 outbreak, there is an urgent
need to understand the neurotropic potential of the COVID-19 virus
in order to prioritize and individualize the treatment protocols based
on the severity of the disease and predominant organ involvement.
Also, a staging system based on the severity and organ involvement
is needed in COVID-19 in order to rank the patients for aggressive
or conventional treatment modalities.
Acknowledgments|The authors would
like to thank the staff and faculty
members of the Department of Biological & Biomedical Sciences,
Aga Khan University, who, despite their busy schedule, made it to
the COVID-19 presentations made by the authors and provided them with
their input on the rationale of this study. The authors would also
like to acknowledge the efforts of Ms. Preet Katyara for her critical
review of our paper.
Notes|The terms COVID-19 virus and SARS-CoV-2 are
used in this paper, that refer to the novel coronavirus involved in
the ongoing outbreak.
Abstract|Flavonoids are known to trigger the intrinsic genetic adaptive programs to hypoxic or oxidative stress via estrogen receptor engagement or upstream kinase activation. To reveal specific structural requirements for direct stabilization of the transcription factors responsible for triggering the antihypoxic and antioxidant programs, we studied flavones, isoflavones and catechols including dihydroxybenzoate, didox, levodopa, and nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), using novel luciferase-based reporters specific for the first step in HIF1 or Nrf2 protein stabilization. Distinct structural requirements for either transcription factor stabilization have been found: as expected, these requirements for activation of HIF ODD-luc reporter correlate with in silico binding to HIF prolyl hydroxylase. By contrast, stabilization of Nrf2 requires the presence of 3,4-dihydroxy- (catechol) groups. Thus, only some but not all flavonoids are direct activators of the hypoxic and antioxidant genetic programs. NDGA from the Creosote bush resembles the best flavonoids in their ability to directly stabilize HIF1 and Nrf2 and is superior with respect to LOX inhibition thus favoring this compound over others. Given much higher bioavailability and stability of NDGA than any flavonoid, NDGA has been tested in a 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-animal model of Parkinson’s Disease and demonstrated neuroprotective effects.Keywords: Parkinson’s disease model, glutathione depletion model, HIF prolyl hydroxylase, lipoxygenase, fisetin, luteolin, Keap1
MATERIALS AND METHODS|ReagentsFlavonoids were purchased from Indofine Chem Co., Inc. (Hillsborough, NJ), FG-4592 was from Selleckchem (Houston, TX), Didox from Cayman Chemical Co. (Ann Arbor, MI). All other reagents used were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).Determination of iron binding constantCalcein displacement assay in the presence of varied concentrations of flavonoids and catechols has been used. Calcein release from its complex with iron was monitored by fluorescence as described in [26].Determination of rate constant for non-enzymatic ferricyanide reductionThe rate of ferricyanide reduction by individual flavonoids was measured spectrophotometrically at 420 nm with the fixed concentration of ferricyanide (1 mM) and varied concentrations of a flavonoid in Potassium-phosphate buffer, pH 7.0. The rate constant for direct ferricyanide reduction was calculated from the slope of the dependence reaction rate vs flavonoid concentration and used as a measure of flavonoid non-specific reducing power.Rabbit LOX 12/15 (Rabbit Reticulocyte 15-LOX-1) activityThe activity of the purified enzyme was measured in the end-point in vitro assay of arachidonic acid oxidation following the formation of fluorescent diphenyl-1-pyrenylphosphine oxide [28]. DMSO was used as a control. The compounds were tested at 25 µM concentration.HIF1 ODD-luc and Neh2-luc reporter assaysSH-SY5Y cell lines stably expressing HIF1 ODD-luc [26] or Neh2-luc [27] reporters were grown in the DMEM/F12 supplemented with GlutaMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin and plated into 384-well white flat-bottom plates at 7,000 cell/well in 30 µl serum and incubated overnight at 37°C, 5% CO2. The next day compounds were added to a final concentration of 10 µM and the plates were incubated for 3 hours at 37°C. Reporter activation after 3 h incubation with the studied compound was compared to that for ciclopirox (HIF1 ODD-luc reporter) or TBHQ (Neh2-luc reporter), taken as 100%. Luciferase reporter activity was measured with a SteadyGlo reagent from Promega providing stable reading for 1 h.Extended SAR AnalysisSelected hits were tested in 96-format white, flat-bottom plates with varied concentrations of an inhibitor (0.5-25 µM). Cells were plated at the density of 25,000 cell per well using a WellMate multichannel dispenser from Matrix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and grown overnight on DMEM/F12+GlutaMAX (100 µl per well). Then an inhibitor was added, and the plates were incubated for a fixed time interval; the medium was removed, cells lysed, and luciferase activity was measured on a SpectraMax M5e platereader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) with BrightGlo™ reagent (Promega, Madison, WI). The reporter activation was normalized to the background luminescence. The effect of 0.5 mM N-acetylcysteine (NAC) was studied by simultaneous addition of 5 µL of 10 mM stock of NAC in water and 2 µL of 50x stock solutions of a flavonoid in DMSO.HRE-luc reporter assayA promoter-reporter construct that contained 68 bp of a known hypoxia and HIF-1 regulated gene, enolase, containing a wild type hypoxia response element (HRE, 5’-RCTGT-3’), is a widely used approach for screening for HIF activators of different mechanism of action [29]. A cell-based assay with HRE-luciferase reporter system is based on transfected immortalized hippocampal cell line (HT22) and allows screening for a broad spectrum of compounds that include: activators of HIF transcription; activators of HIF binding to HRE; and effectors of HIF protein stability (PHD inhibitors, pVHL & proteasome inhibitors). The assay was performed the same way as for HIF ODD-luc reporter except the cells were plated at the density of 10,000 cell per well and incubated overnight.Glutathione depletion model and Viability AssayPrimary neuronal cultures were prepared from the forebrains of Sprague-Dawley rat embryos (E17) and plated on 96 well plates at a 106 cells/ml density. After 24 hours, cells were rinsed with warm PBS and then placed in minimum Essential Medium (MEM; Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) containing 5 mM HCA in the presence of a compound of interest at varied concentrations. Cells were incubated for 24 h or longer to see 90% cell death in HCA treated controls. Viability was assessed by the MTT (4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay.RNA isolation and real-time RT-PCRFor VEGF gene expression studies, total RNA was isolated from immature primary cortical neurons, pretreated overnight with the indicated concentration of a bioactive compound, using the NucleoSpin RNA II kit (Macherey-Nagel, Bethlehem, PA) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Real-time PCR was performed in triplicate as a duplex reaction using a VEGF (Mm01281449_m1) gene expression assay with a 6-carboxyfluorescein-labeled probe, and a β actin gene expression assay with a VIC-labeled probe (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), so that gene amplification could be normalized to β actin. These experiments were performed using a 7500 Real-time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) using standard PCR protocol and amplification conditions.AnimalsMice were housed and treated in strict accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York and Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta approved all procedures. Mice were maintained in a pathogen-free facility and exposed to a 12 h light/dark cycle with food and water provided ad libitum. C57Bl6 mice were procured from Jackson laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME).MPTP and NDGA administration in mice for neuroprotective studiesAcute MPTP-intoxication paradigm was used to test the neuroprotective effects of NDGA using male C57Bl6 mice. In this protocol, 10-week-old C57Bl6 mice (n = 8-10 per group) were divided into four different groups consisting of 1) a control group treated with saline alone; 2) a group treated with MPTP alone; 3) a group treated with NDGA alone and; 4) group treated with NDGA in combination with MPTP. NDGA was dissolved in 1:4 ethanol:neobee oil (a derivative of coconut oil). MPTP 10 mg/kg free base was administered intraperitoneally three times a day every two hours. Animals with NDGA in combination with MPTP were administered NDGA by oral gavage with 50 and 100mg/kg/day body weight of the drug in 100 microliter volume once a day for 4 days before MPTP and once a day for 3 days after MPTP. On the day of MPTP NDGA was administered to mice 2 hours before the initiation of MPTP. Animals belonging to MPTP and control groups received the vehicle (ethanol:neobee oil, 1:4) whereas the drug alone group received respective doses of NDGA at the same frequency. Animals belonging to MPTP and control groups received the vehicle (ethanol:neobee oil, 1:4) whereas the drug alone group received respective doses of NDGA at the same frequency. All animals were sacrificed on the 7th day after MPTP.Measurement of striatal levels of catecholamines and MPP+ by HPLCStriatal levels of dopamine (DA) and its metabolites 3, 4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), and homovanillic acid (HVA) were measured after sonication and centrifugation in chilled 0.1 M perchloric acid (PCA, 100 µl/mg tissue) as previously described. Briefly, 15 µl supernatant was isocratically eluted through an 80 x 4.6 mm C18 column (ESA, Inc. Chelmsford, MA) with a mobile phase containing 0.1 M LiH2PO4, 0.85 mM 1-octanesulfonic acid and 10% (v/v) methanol and detected by a 2-channel Coulochem II electrochemical detector (ESA, Inc. Chelmsford, MA). Concentrations of dopamine, DOPAC and HVA are expressed as ng per mg protein. The protein concentrations of tissue homogenates were measured according to BCA assay (Pierce Biotech). For MPP+ measurement NDGA was administered at a dose of 100mg/kg/day once daily for four days followed by a dose on the 5th day 30 minutes before MPTP (30mg/kg free base). Striatal tissues were sonicated and centrifuged in 0.1 M PCA and an aliquot of supernatant was injected onto a Brownlee aquapore x 03-224 cation exchange column (Rainin, Woburn, MA). Samples were eluted isocratically with 20 mM boric acid-sodium borate buffer, pH 7.75, containing 3 mM tetrabutylammonium hydrogen sulfate, 0.25 mM 1-heptanesulfonic acid and 10% isopropanol. MPP+ levels were detected with a fluorescence detector set by excitation at 295 nm and emission at 375nm [30].Immunohistochemistry and morphometric analysisMice were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital, transcardially perfused with 0.9% saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS, pH 7.4. Brains were dissected out, post fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h and cryopreserved in 30% sucrose/PBS for 48 h. Snap-frozen brains were coronally sectioned at 40 µm thickness encompassing the substantia nigra using a cryostat. Briefly, sections were rinsed in PBS and incubated in 3% hydrogen peroxide/10% methanol solution for 10 min to quench endogenous peroxidase activity. Sections were permeabilized/blocked in 10% normal goat serum (NGS)/0.1% Triton X-100/PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies in PBS containing 2% NGS/0.01% Triton X-100: rabbit polyclonal anti-tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (1:1000) (Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO). Biotinylated secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc.) were used appropriately after incubation with streptavidin ABC solution (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Immunostaining was visualized by diaminobenzidine (Sigma, St Louis, MO) chromogen. Sections were mounted on glass, dehydrated and cover slipped with cytoseal (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Digital images were captured with Coolpix 5000 Nikon Camera. Tyrosine hydroxylase immunostained sections were counterstained with thionin before dehydration and cover slipped with cytoseal. Nissl (thionin)-stained and tyrosine hydroxylase-positive neuronal counts were estimated within the substantia nigra by Stereoinvestigator software (Microbrightfield) as previously described [30].Computer modelingDocking experiments were performed using the CDOCKER algorithm as implemented in the Discovery studio 2.5 software suite (Accelrys, San Diego, CA), followed by force field minimization and binding energy calculations using the PHD2 crystal structure with the bound inhibitor (2G19.pdb) as the starting template structure. Preparation of the receptor was done by running a protein check and identifying all the elements of the structure. It was noted that there were amino acids missing on the N-terminus and C-terminus, however these were not in close proximity to the binding site and therefore there was no need to add them to the structure. Force field minimization was carried out using the molecular mechanics algorithm CHARMm as implemented in Discovery Studio 2.5.Statistical AnalysisAll in vitro assays were performed at least in triplicate, and presented in Table as mean ± SD. Results of in vivo experiments were expressed as means ± SEM or mean ± STDEV. Significance was determined by one-way or two-way ANOVA followed by the Student-Newman-Keuls test or a two-tailed unpaired Student t test. Significance was set at P ≤ 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed using the Prism software (GraphPad, San Diego, CA).RESULTSThe Spectrum library of FDA approved drugs and biologically active compounds contains a large variety of flavonoids (80 flavones, 90 isoflavones, 16 flavanones). To derive structure-activity relationship (SAR), activation parameters for flavones and isoflavones of interest (purchased in the form of powder) were determined from titration curves for all reporter assays (Table 1A&B). In the case of HIF1 ODD-luc and Neh2-luc reporter assays, only a limited number of compounds showed activation at 3 hr incubation. The comparison of HIF1 ODD-luc and HRE-luc activators proves that all HIF ODD-luc stabilizers induce HRE-driven expression, but not vice versa. Comparison of the hits in HIF ODD-luc and Neh2-luc assay (Table 1A&B) clearly points to the distinct structural requirements for either reporter activation as presented below.Table 1BComparison of isoflavones and catechols performance in reporter activation assays. Original data in the table represent Mean ± SD.#Trivialand Chemical NamesActivation parameters at 10 µMIron chelationRedox propertiesODD-luc foldHRE-luc foldNeh2-luc fold(EC50), µMIron complex Diss. Const, µMFC red Rate Const, mM-1s-1EHOMO,eV [41] II. Isoflavones21Methoxyvone5-Methyl-7-methoxy-Inactive3.2±0.35InactiveInactiven.d.22Ipriflavone7-Isopropoxy-3-phenyl-Inactive2.5±0.3InactiveInactiven.d.23Genistein6,7,4’-Trihydroxy-Inactive1.5±0.2InactiveInactiven.d.245-Hydroxy-daidzein5,7,4’-Trihydroxy-InactiveInactiveInactiveInactiven.d.258-Hydroxy-daidzein7,8,4’-Trihydroxy-InactiveInactiveInactive1.5±0.3n.d.26Daidzein7,4’-Dihydroxy-InactiveInactiveInactiveInactiven.d.273’-Hydroxy-daidzein7,3’,4’-Trihydroxy-2.5±0.32.5±0.315±25±0.63.5±0.4n.d. III. Catechols28NDGA 4,4'-(2,3-dimethylbutane-1,4-diyl)dibenzene-1,2-diol2.5±0.32±0.215±1.8(2±0.3)2.5±0.3n.d.29Levodopa3,4-Dihydroxy-L-phenylalanine2.0±0.251.7±0.2Inactive(20±3)2.5±0.3n.d.30D-DOPA3,4-Dihydroxy-D-phenylalanineInactiveInactiveInactive(20±3)2.5±0.3n.d.31CarbidopaN-AminomethyldopaInactiveInactiveInactive(20±3)2.5±0.3n.d.32DHBEthyl 3,4-dihydroxybenzoateActive above 50 µMActive above 20 µMInactive(20±3)2.5±0.3n.d.33Didox3,4-Dihydroxy-benzohydroxamateActive above 100 µMActive above 100 µMInactive(100±5)1.5±0.3n.d. IV. Other34Calcein2.0±0.251.7±0.2Inactive0.05±0.01n.d.Open in a separate window
Structure-activity relationship (SAR) for activators of HIF1 ODD-luc reporterFlavones Distinguishing between iron non-specific chelation in solution and specific iron coordination inside the active center of HIF PHD is a challenge. To identify specific inhibitors we used the same approach we developed before for the comparison of branched oxyquinolines as HIF PHD inhibitors [26]. For compounds with iron binding properties, the judgment on the specificity for reporter activation (or enzyme inhibition in vitro) can be made from the plot of the reporter activation (or enzyme inhibition constant) versus the iron binding constant [26]. Non-specific inhibitors will show a linear plot with increasing activation numbers for increasing iron binding constants, whereas specific inhibitors will deviate (pop-up) from this tendency. As shown in Fig 2A, there is no linear dependence on flavones’ iron chelation ability for ODD HIF1-luc activation parameters, although all flavones shown in Fig 2A are iron chelators in the micromolar range. Luteolin and 3’,4’-dihydroxyflavone (#18 & 19, Table 1A) are clearly the best activators. 7,8-Dihydroxyflavone (#20) is the most potent iron chelator among all flavones tested, with iron dissociation constant of ca. 700 nM. 3-Hydroxyflavone (#1) has the constant of ca. 2 µM, while 5-hydroxyflavone does not bind iron in solution. The order of iron dissociation constant values is: CalceinAM << 7,8-Dihydroxyflavone << 3-hydroxyflavone < baicalein < quercetin=fisetin < 3’,4’-dihydroxyflavone < galangin = luteolin < 3-hydroxy-4’-methoxyflavone < 3-hydroxy-7-methoxyflavone (the latter has the dissociation constant of ca. 5 µM, #5 in Table 1A). The order of the activity increase in HIF1 ODD-luc reporter activation is: 7,8-Dihydroxyflavone<3-hydroxyflavone<calcein <fisetin<quercetin<luteolin=3’,4’-dihydroxy-flavone, with baicalein, galangin and 3-hydroxy-7-methoxyflavone (3OH7OCH3 in Fig. 2A) being inactive in the reporter assay. In HIF1 ODD-luc screen, calcein AM (#29) works no better than luteolin (#18), although their iron dissociation constants differ by 2 orders of magnitude (Table 1A and ​andB),B), pointing again to the need in specific inhibition and not iron chelation in solution. Quercetin has been shown to directly inhibit HIF prolyl hydroxylase 2 [8]; its effect was ascribed by authors to its iron chelation ability in solution, based on comparison of inhibitory properties of 3-hydroxyflavone, 5-hydroxyflavone, 3’4’-dihydroxyflavone and their methoxy analogs, largely because of the inability of the existing in vitro capture assays to generate reliable quantitative data for iron chelators. Amgen’s capture assay protocol gives Ki of 10 µM for quercetin [7], which is a rather high estimate given the EC50 determined in HIF1 ODD-luc reporter assay (ca. 2.5 µM). In accord with the data obtained, luteolin is the best enzyme inhibitor among the flavones tested.Open in a separate windowFigure 2.Specificity for the flavone structure in HIF1 ODD-reporter activation. A) Independence of activation amplitude from iron binding constant, and B) Independence of activation amplitude from ferricyanide (FC) reduction rate constant (The protocols for the determination of the constants under Materials and Methods).
In addition to metal chelation properties, majority of flavones are potent reducing agents. One may expect that the intermediate oxo-iron form of HIF PHD can be reduced by a flavonoid, and hence, the enzyme is inhibited and HIF1 stabilized (HIF1 ODD-luc protein in the case of this reporter). To evaluate the reducing power of flavonoids, we have measured the rate constants for flavonoids oxidation with ferricyanide. If non-specific reduction of the enzyme intermediate had been the case, we would observe a linear dependence of reporter activation versus the rate constant for non-specific ferricyanide reduction by flavones. However, this dependence shows no linear trend (Fig. 2B), and again, luteolin pops-up among all other flavones tested. Therefore, neither iron chelation nor reducing properties of flavones determine HIF1 ODD-luc reporter activation. In other words, there are specific structural requirements for the reporter activation by flavones that are in agreement with docking predictions (Fig. 3) for HIF PHD2 inhibition, as follows. (a) 3-Hydroxyflavones are good activators as long as there are no substitutions in phenyl ring at positions 2’-4’ (compare compounds #1,2 vs. #3,4 and kaempferol #9 Table 1A); (b) 3-Hydroxygroup is critical for activation providing the iron chelation motif (compare #1 vs #6 & #7) (Fig. 3A); the presence of 5-hydroxygroup in addition to 3-hydroxygroup destabilizes iron coordination and decreases the activation effect (see #7 and galangin #8); (c) Substitutions in the phenyl ring for 3-hydroxyflavones give active compounds only in combination with 3’,4’-dihydroxy motif (fisetin #10, quercetin #11, myricetin #13) but not 2’,4’-dihydroxygroups (morin #12); (d) 5-Hydroxyflavone has no iron chelation properties in solution, and its derivatives are inactive independent of the presence of additional hydroxyl-groups in positions 6 and 7 (#14-17 Table 1A); (e) Only the presence of 3’4’-dihydroxy-group in phenyl ring providing interaction within the binding pocket of PHD2 gives an active 5-hydroxyflavone compound (luteolin, #18 in Table 1A, Fig. 3B,C). Of note, 3’4’-dihydroxy-flavone is as potent as luteolin (#19 Table 1A). Summarizing our findings, we conclude that catechol moiety in flavonoids is a must for inhibiting HIF PHDs in the absence of 3-hydroxy-substitution.Open in a separate windowFigure 3.Structural requirements for activating HIF1 ODD-luc reporter correspond to those for inhibiting HIF PHD2. A) 3,7-hydroxyflavone docking into PHD2 active site illustrating bi-ligand iron chelation via carbonyl oxygen and 3-hydroxygroup and interaction of 5-hydroxygrop with Met299; B) docking of luteolin, active center view, and C) overall view; D) docking of 3’-hydroxydaidzein, and E) NDGA.Isoflavones In the case of isoflavones the structural requirements for HIF1 ODD-luc activation are less clear since the hit rate for isoflavones was much lower than for flavones. Daidzein (#26 Table 1B) did not cause any activation effect at short incubation times, whereas 3’-hydroxydaidzein (#27) was almost as potent as quercetin or luteolin (Table 1A), and this observation was supported by docking (Fig. 3D). 3’-Hydroxylation of flavonoids is known to be catalyzed by liver [31]. 3’-Hydroxydaidzein is one of the major metabolites of daidzein (in addition to equol). Comparison of 3’-hydroxydaidzein with 2 other trihydroxyisoflavones (##24,25) known for their higher iron binding and antioxidant activity (radical scavenging activity of 8’-hydroxydaidzein equals to that of alpha-tocopherol [32-34]) shows that the latter compounds are inactive in the low micromolar range (< 10 µM) (Table 1B). This observation again points to the fact that just radical scavenging activity is not sufficient to drive the antihypoxic program.The effects generated by flavones/isoflavones in HIF1 ODD-luc screen could not be explained by their estrogenic activity: first, because this screen is specific for HIF PHD inhibitors, and second, the known ranking for the activation of estrogen receptors ERα (genistein > daidzein > apigenin > biochanin A = kaempferol > ipriflavone = quercetin = chrysin) and ERβ (genistein > daidzein > biochanin A = apigenin = kaempferol > quercetin = ipriflavone = chrysin) [5] does not correlate with their ranking in our systems. On the contrary, we believe that estrogens can work as HIF prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors because estradiol and estriol came up as poor hits in Spectrum library screen using HIF ODD-luc reporter system [26].Catechols and NDGA Dihydroxybenzoate (DHB) bearing a classic catechol motif, is a known inhibitor of HIF prolyl hydroxylase mimicking the α-KG binding mode in the enzyme active center: the DHB’s catechol motif provides two ligands for the HIF prolyl hydroxylase iron and DHB’s carboxy-group bids to Arg-383 deep inside the enzyme active center. DHB has the enzyme inhibition constant of 5 µM determined in the enzyme in vitro assay [35], but is a rather weak reporter activator working above 50 µM (Table 1B). The offset in the activation parameters originates from DHB competition with the intracellular α-KG (1 to 2 mM). A more than an order of magnitude offset of EC50 for cell-based reporter activation versus the value of the inhibition constant measured in the enzyme in vitro assay has been reported for all enzyme inhibitors mimicking α-ketoglutarate mode of binding [36]. Spectrum library had a number of levodopa analogs, and to our surprise, only levodopa by itself, but not D-DOPA or carbidopa, behaved as a rather potent HIF1 ODD-luc reporter activator with EC50=15 µM. (Table 1B). These results are supported by docking studies (not shown). Didox, the ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor currently in clinical trials for the cancer treatment, has two distinct iron binding motifs, and possibly, due to iron coordination by the hydroxamic acid motif, is a much weaker enzyme inhibitor working in the reporter assay only above 100 µM (Table 1B). Despite the fact that NDGA activates the reporter only 2-fold (Table 1B), it has an EC50 value of ca. 2 µM. In the docking studies, one catechol motif of NDGA interacts with the active site Arg-383, whereas the other interacts with Arg-322 at the active site entrance (Fig. 3E).LOX inhibition and VEGF inductionComparison of flavonoids and NDGA in LOX inhibition assay demonstrates that all flavonoids except genistein are good LOX inhibitors, but less potent than NDGA (Fig. 4A). In addition to being a key redox enzyme in oxidative stress-related cell death, 12/15-LOX has also been shown to regulate HIF1 and induce VEGF [37, 38]. Comparison of one of the best flavones, 3’,4’-dihydroxyflavone to NDGA and FG-4592, a HIF PHD inhibitor developed by Fibrogen (Fig. 4B) demonstrates that flavones are mild inducers compared to FG-4592 and NDGA, and that the latter is at least 2-times more potent than FG-4592. This result may reflect the double nature of NDGA inhibitory effect targeting both LOX and HIF PHD.Open in a separate windowFigure 4.Comparison of NDGA with flavonoids. A) Inhibition of rabbit reticulocyte 15-LOX-1 activity; B) Induction of VEGF mRNA. C1, fisetin, C2, luteolin, C3, kaempferol, C4, genistein, C5, NDGA, C6, quercetin, C7, 3’4’-dihydroxyflavone, C8, FG-4592, used as a control HIF PHD inhibitor. For LOX inhibition compounds were used at 25 µM; for VEGF induction pretreatment was performed at concentrations shown in brackets in µM.
Neuroprotection in glutathione depletion model is in agreement with compounds’ ranking in HIF ODD-luc reporter assayThe prior studies on HIF PHD inhibition in a glutathione depletion model of oxidative stress in cortical neurons (homocysteinic acid model, HCA model) revealed that inhibition of HIF PHD1 by gene silencing or with canonical PHD inhibitors such DFO (iron chelator), DHB, and DMOG (α-KG mimics), was sufficient to prevent cell death independent of HIF1 [39]. The flavone hits identified in HTS with HIF1 ODD-luc reporter are definitely not PHD-isoform specific, therefore, one may expect that they will target PHD1 as well and exert neuroprotection in the above model in accord with their ranking in the reporter assay.The structural requirements for HIF PHD2 inhibition are best exemplified by comparison of fisetin (“memory booster” [40] and luteolin (#10 & #18, respectively, Table 1A). Both compounds are potent reducing agents, and do not significantly differ in their ability to bind iron in solution (both have catechol moiety which is capable of binding iron). The combination of 3’4’- dihydroxy-groups with 3-hydroxyflavone (fisetin) interferes with the optimal docking into PHD2 and gives a lower reporter signal than their combination with 5-hydroxyflavone (luteolin) (Table 1A).Compound ranking in the glutathione depletion assay corresponds to that in HIF ODD-luc reporter activation: luteolin exerts neuroprotection in the glutathione depletion model already at 1.2 µM whereas fisetin begins to work at 2.5 µM (Fig. 5) despite the fact they are equipotent as LOX inhibitors. In the case of 3’-hydroxydaidzein and daidzein, the former is protective in the glutathione depletion model while the latter is not, consistent with the predictions based on the compounds’ activity in the reporter assay. Similarly, in accord with the ranking in the reporter activation assay, levodopa is protective in the glutathione depletion model with EC50= 6 µM, whereas carbidopa is non-protective up to 20 µM (results not shown). 3’-hydroxydaidzein and NDGA exhibit similar properties in HIF ODD-luc reporter activation (Table 1B) and in neuroprotection in the glutathione depletion model already at 2.5 µM (Fig. 5), despite the fact that NDGA is a more potent LOX inhibitor than any flavonoid. One may speculate that HIF PHD works upstream of LOX or belongs to a different, or parallel pathway having a major impact on cell survival under glutathione depletion conditions.Open in a separate windowFigure 5.Comparison of effects of flavonoids and catechols in glutathione depletion model. Neuroprotective effects in HCA model correspond to compounds ranking in HIF ODD-luc screen (A, fisetin, B, luteolin, C, 3’-hydroxydaidzein, D, daidzein, E, NDGA).Structure-activity relationship (SAR) for activators of Neh2-luc reporterFlavones As could be seen from Table 1A, Neh2-luc reporter activation requires a combination of 3-hydroxygroup (forming a metal chelation motif) with a catechol type 3’,4’-dihydroxygroup, a pro-oxidant motif. There is no linear dependence on redox potential [41] of flavones (Fig. 6) pointing to the fact that Nrf2-Keap1 interaction is disrupted by specific flavones bearing the pro-oxidant motif in combination with zinc chelation motif. The activity exhibited by kaempferol may be considered as an argument against such interpretation, however, the simultaneous addition of N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), a potent cell-permeable reducing agent, with flavones has no effect on reporter activation by fisetin or quercetin, but exerts a 2-fold drop in reporter activation by kaempferol (results not shown). Quenching by NAC points to an additional oxidative modification by 3-hydroxylase taking place in the case of kaempferol. This enzymatic hydroxylation has specific steric requirements since morin bearing hydroxygroups in para- and meta-position (4’ and 2’) and thus having a restricted access to the 3’-position for catalytic hydroxylation is completely inactive in the reporter assay despite the fact that it has the same redox potential as fisetin, quercetin, and kaempferol (Table 1A). The latter three flavonoids have been previously reported as potent Nrf2 stabilizers and HO-1 inducers among other flavonoids tested (see Fig. 3, p.175 in [42]).Open in a separate windowFigure 6.Independence of Neh2-luc reporter activation from redox potential (EHOMO) of flavones.

Isoflavones and catechols As we demonstrated earlier, catechol by itself is an Neh2-luc reporter activator, which requires an additional modification, since there is a lag-period on the time course of reporter activation that cannot be shortened with increasing concentrations of the activator [27]. Didox is apparently a very weak Nrf2 activator, although it has the combination of catechol and zinc-binding motif (Table 1B). This may result from lower cell membrane permeability for negatively charged compounds. The same is true for levodopa and its analogs. In Neh2-luc reporter assay only isoflavones bearing a catechol motif were active: 3’-hydroxydaidzein was active, and daidzein not, again pointing to the pro-oxidant action of a catechol motif. 3’-Hydroxydaidzein properties in both reporter assays (Table 1B) strongly resemble NDGA, except NDGA is a much more potent and direct activator of Nrf2 similar to fisetin [27]. Like isoflavones, NDGA has estrogenic receptors as additional targets, and is the best inhibitor of LOX among the compounds studied in this work (Fig. 4A).Nrf2 activators have been proved to benefit outcomes in Parkinson’s disease (PD) animal models, and given the fact that NDGA is much more stable in vivo than flavonoids undergoing cycle opening reactions, can reach decent concentrations in blood and crosses the blood-brain barrier, NDGA was chosen to run in vivo experiments. The additional advantage for choosing NDGA is that it also inhibits LOX and stabilizes HIF1 in the low concentration range. HIF1 has been recently shown to induce ATP13A2 (PARK9) [43], mutations of which cause an autosomal recessive form of early-onset parkinsonism (Kufor-Rakeb Syndrome) [44].Neuroprotective effects of NDGA in the acute MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s diseaseSeveral lines of studies suggest that activation of Nrf2 mediated gene transcription either via a genetic or pharmacologic approaches have profound neuroprotective effects against MPTP-neurotoxicity [30, 45, 46]. Hence, we sought to test if activation of Nrf2/ARE signaling by NDGA can induce a neuroprotective response against MPTP-neurotoxicity. We used an acute paradigm of MPTP administration (10 mg MPTP/kg X 3, every two hours), known to cause about a 50% loss of striatal dopamine and its metabolites DOPAC and HVA and significant loss of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunopositive neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) on the 7th day. Evaluation of neuroprotective effects of NDGA against MPTP neurotoxicity found that pretreatment of NDGA at 100mg/kg/day but not 50mg/kg/day protected against MPTP-induced loss of striatal dopamine, DOPAC and HVA (Table 2). Consistent with levels of striatal catecholamines unbiased stereologic counts of total (i.e. Nissl-positive) and TH-positive neurons in SNpc showed a statistically significant loss of neurons in the MPTP group compared to controls (Fig. 7). Analysis of total and TH-positive neuronal counts for NDGA, when administered at 100mg/kg/day, showed a significant attenuation of MPTP-induced loss of total (i.e. Nissl-positive) and TH-immunopositive neurons as compared to MPTP treated mice (Fig. 7). The doses that were used to determine the efficacy of NDGA against MPTP were determined by evaluation of brain HO-1 levels. Both 50 and 100 mg/kg administered twice a day induced a dose dependent increase in HO-1 mRNA levels at 6 hours after last dose of NDGA. At 100 mg/kg HO-1 levels showed a 6-fold increase whereas 50 mg/kg only induced a 1.2 fold increase in HO-1 mRNA levels (data not shown). The neuroprotective effects of NDGA against MPTP-neurotoxicity were not due to impaired metabolism of MPTP to its toxic metabolite MPP+ (1-methyl-4-phenyl-pyridinium ion) as judged by HPLC-fluorimetric analysis of striatal MPP+ levels measured 90 minutes following a single intraperitoneal injection of 30 mg/kg free base MPTP: no significant difference between the MPTP and NDGA+MPTP groups (Table 3). Collectively these results suggest a neuroprotective effect of NDGA in a mouse model of MPTP-induced PD.Table 2Striatal levels of Dopamine and its metabolitesTreatment groupsNDOPAMINEDOPACHVACONTROL589.9 ± 6.18.5 ± 0.767.8 ± 1.2NDGA588.4 ± 6.27.59 ± 1.357.5 ± 1.66MPTP1035.4 ± 3.45*3.92 ± 0.35*4.7 ± 0.63*NDGA+MPTP1055.3 ± 5.7#6.04 ± 1.14#7.4 ± 0.96#Open in a separate windowThe levels were measured by HPLC Electrochemistry. N is the number of animals in the group. Data in the table represent Mean ± SD. Values are ng/mg protein.*p < 0.05 compared to control and#p < 0.05 compared to MPTP.Open in a separate windowFigure 7.Neuroprotective effects of NDGA in the MPTP model of Parkinson's disease. (A) Immunohistochemical staining for TH and (B) stereological analysis of total (NISSL) and TH+-neurons in the SNpc in the acute MPTP model on the 7th day after treatment with NDGA. Bars represent mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05 compared to Vehicle controls, and #p < 0.05 compared to MPTP (n=8 mice per group).Table 3Striatal MPP+ levelsTreatment groupsMPP+MPTP8.1 ± 0.14NDGA+MPTP8.4 ± 0.22Open in a separate windowThe levels were measured following MPTP and NDGA+MPTP at 90 min. Data in the table represent Mean ± SD. Values are ng/mg weight of the striatal tissue (n=5 mice per group). The values are not significant between MPTP and NDGA + MPTP, therefore significance is not shown.

DISCUSSION|There is a popular opinion that flavonoids are good iron chelators and potent antioxidants and this is sufficient to drive the antihypoxic and antioxidant response. This study demonstrates that there are distinct structural requirements for activation of either program at the step of transcription factor stabilization. The structural requirements for activation of HIF ODD-luc reporter correspond to those necessary to inhibit HIF prolyl hydroxylase, whereas structural requirements for stabilization of Nrf2 require the combination of 3-hydroxy- and 3’4’-dihydroxy- groups.The ranking of luteolin and fisetin in Neh2-luc activation (fisetin, the best one) is completely opposite to that for HIF1 ODD-luc activation (luteolin, the best one) again pointing to the need in a chelation motif for Nrf2 activation. A logical speculation is that flavones target cysteine residues coordinating Zn2+ atom in Keap1 [47] resulting in significant conformational changes in the latter. The 3-hydroxy group is not obligatory for Neh2-luc activation, since 3’,4’-dihydroxyflavone is an activator with the potency comparable to kaempferol (Table 1A). However, just zinc coordination ability without pro-oxidant catechol motif is insufficient for the reporter activation since 3-hydroxyflavone is completely inactive (Table 1A).It is interesting to note that ARE-luc screen used to rank flavonoids as Nrf2 activators came to the same conclusion on structural requirements, despite the authors claimed linear dependence of flavone activity on redox potential [41]. This discrepancy reflects imperfections of ARE-luc screen, with prolonged incubation times being the major disadvantage, which in the case of flavonoids results in monitoring the effect of their oxidative products as well. A good illustration to the above statement is soy isoflavone daidzein, which is supposed to be beneficial for survival under various stress conditions [48, 49]. However, based on our results, large portion of daidzein benefits one must ascribe to its major metabolite, 3’-hydroxydaidzein, the direct activator of both survival programs.No doubt the dietary flavonoids are beneficial for intestines, where their bioavailability can reach dozens of µM, contrary to plasma concentrations reaching just 0.5 µM, which is not sufficient to drive the antihypoxic or antioxidant program, especially in the brain. Low bioavailbility of flavonoids drives medicinal chemistry efforts to design their structural analogs of higher bioavailability with uncompromised biological activity in specific in vitro models [50]. Despite the known low bioavailability and stability, quercetin in 25-75 mg/kg dose twice a day for 4 days was shown to be neuroprotective in the rotenone-induced hemiparkinsonian rats [51]. Our choice of NDGA to run in vivo animal model for PD, and not a flavonoid, was based on the understanding of these limitations of flavonoids bioavailability on one hand, and the “multi-target” advantage of NDGA similar to the best flavonoids from this study on the other hand. MPTP-model is a toxic model and we suppose that superior Nrf2 activator properties of NDGA in combination of potent inhibition of LOX play a major role in neuroprotection. As we predicted, NDGA was demonstrated to be neuroprotective in a PD animal model.ConclusionAll flavonoids are commonly considered as powerful cell survival agents, but the precise mechanisms for this remain obscure. Using two novel reporters we demonstrate that there are distinct structural requirements for direct stabilization of HIF and Nrf2 transcription factors by flavonoids. We show that 3’-hydroxydaidzein, but not daidzein itself, is a direct trigger of antihypoxic and antioxidant programs. We choose NDGA, a natural catechol with high stability and bioavailability, with similar properties to 3’-hydroxydaidzein, for in vivo studies in Parkinson’s disease model, and demonstrate its neuroprotective effects.
Acknowledgement|Funded by Winifred Masterson Burke Relief Foundation (IGG), Thomas Hartman Foundation for PD (IGG), Russian Foundation for Basic Research RFBR14-04-32309-mol_a (DMH), NIH NS062165 and NS060885 (BT), and Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s disease (BT), National Parkinson Foundation CSRA chapter (BT), and PAR fore Parkinson (BT). NAK is a Parkinson Foundation postdoctoral fellow.
Footnotes|Author Disclosure StatementNo competing financial interests are declared.
Abstract|Background and aimsThe outbreak of the new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, causes a respiratory disease and individuals with pre-existing cardiometabolic disorders display worse prognosis through the infection course. The aim of this minireview is to present epidemiological data related to metabolic comorbidities in association with the SARS-CoV-2.MethodsThis is a narrative mini-review with Pubmed search until April 23, 2020 using the keywords COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, treatment of coronavirus and following terms: diabetes mellitus, obesity, arterial hypertension, ACE-inhibitors, cytokine storm, immune response and vitamin D.ResultsStudies indicate that obese individuals are more likely to develop infections, and that adipose tissue serves as a pathogen reservoir. In diabetic individuals higher rate of inflammatory processes is seen due to constant glucose recognition by C type lectin receptors. Hypertensive individuals, usually grouped with other conditions, are treated with drugs to reduce blood pressure mostly through ACEi and ARB, that leads to increased ACE2 expression, used by SARS-CoV-2 for human’s cell entry. Until now, the studies have shown that individuals with those conditions and affected by COVID-19 present an uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and an unbalanced immune response, leading to the cytokine storm phenomenon. Vitamin D is highlighted as a potential therapeutic target, because in addition to acting on the immune system, it plays an important role in the control of cardiometabolic diseases.ConclusionCurrently, since there is no proven and effective antiviral therapy for SARS-CoV-2, the efforts should focus on controlling inflammatory response and reduce the risks of associated complications.Keywords: Diabetes mellitus, Obesity, Hypertension arterial, Vitamin D, Immune response
1. Introduction|Diabetes, hypertension and other cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are strongly related to a higher risk of mortality or disease’s severity among COVID-19 patients. In China, from 44,672 confirmed cases, 4.7% were critical, with a case-fatality rate (CFR) of 49%. Patients without comorbidities had lower CFR (0.9%), while those with CVDs, diabetes and hypertension had higher rates (10.5%, 7.3%, 6.5%, respectively) [1]. Obesity is another comorbidity raising the risk of complications in COVID-19 infection. The immune system acts upon inflammation that occurs in adipose tissue due to obesity, increasing vulnerability to infections [2]. Increased circulating levels of many cytokines and proteins released by adipocytes are associated with inflammation in obese individuals [3]. Inflammation from adipose tissue generates chronic and systemic metabolic alterations leading to dyslipidemia, hypertension, CVD and diabetes, thus increasing the risk of infection by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2)2. It is thought that SARS-CoV-2, as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, suppress anti-viral type IFN-γ responses in the early stage of infection leading to an uncontrolled viral replication. This mechanism later leads to an influx of neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages, resulting in hyperproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines that can damage lung tissue (i.e. pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome). Specific Th1/Th17 cells may be activated and contribute to increased inflammation. These facts and the higher mortality by COVID-19 observed in those with underlying diseases indicates that immune response is a determining factor to COVID-19 outcome [4].According to phylogenetic analyses, SARS-CoV-2 is related to other existing respiratory infections, such as SARS-CoV and Middle East respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [5]. SARS-CoV infection accounted for 8098 cases and 774 deaths in 26 countries [6], meanwhile, MERS-CoV infection was identified in 27 countries, with 2449 confirmed cases and 845 deaths [7]. As is being observed in COVID-19, MERS-CoV infection also caused more severe complications in older and immunocompromised patients with a history of diabetes, renal failure, and lung diseases [8]. According to genome sequencing, SARS-CoV-2 is about 89% identical to bat SARS-like-CoVZXC21, 82% identical to human SARS-CoV and about 50% to MERS-CoV [5,9]. Several phylogenetic analyses suggests the bat as most probable animal reservoir for SARS-CoV-2, and as both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV were transmitted from bats to palm civets or dromedary camels, and then to humans, it is possible though that another animal plays the role of intermediate host between bat and human in SARS-CoV-2 infection [10]. These viruses have a structural protein, the Spike glycoprotein (S) that is responsible for its binding to host cells [11]. According to Hoffman [12] protein S is primed by human serine protease (TMPRSS2) and recognized by the cell receptor. A recent study described by Liu [11] shows that SARS-CoV entering in the respiratory tract depends on a receptor-binding domain (RBD) to bind to the host, and protein S has two trimers that bind to the heterodimer of angiotensin-converting enzyme II (ACE2). A synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RBD analysis indicated that the virus enters into the host cell through ACE2 binding. However, MERS-CoV binds specifically to another receptor, dipeptidil peptidase 4 (DPP4) [11,13]. Therefore, since SARS-CoV-2 is analogous to SARS-CoV, it is suggested that both use ACE2 as the main mechanism for cell entry.The pathophysiology of SARS-CoV-2 is not yet well understood, it is known to cause an acute lung injury and that this condition resembles SARS-CoV, which results in aggressive inflammation initiated by viral replication [14]. In this review, we tried to discuss and report possible mechanisms of inflammatory responses mediated by SARS-CoV-2 in individuals with pre-existing cardiometabolic diseases and to speculate possible therapeutic target that can be applied to obtain a better immune response, reduce pro-inflammatory profile, and consequently reduce critical levels of the disease.
2. Search methodology|We systematically searched the PubMed database up until April 23, 2020 using the keywords COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, treatment of coronavirus and following terms: diabetes mellitus, obesity, hypertension arterial, ACE-inhibitors, cytokine storms, immune response and vitamin D. Our database research results were accessed and relevant cross references were made to the proposed mini review.
3. Metabolic syndrome|Approximately 25% of the adult population (40–49 years) have Metabolic Syndrome (MS), this percentage increases as the population ages, reaching more than 40% of the population over 60 years of age [15]. The appreciation of the MS presence was due to the finding of its relationship with cardiovascular and chronic diseases. When present, MS increases twice the mortality of patients with type 2 diabetes and by three times the mortality due to CVDs [15,16].MS can be controlled with the direct action of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), in which, in the normal functioning of the body, this system acts in the regulation of blood pressure [17,18]. Angiotensin-converting enzyme I (ACE) and its counterpart, ACE2, are the main enzymes in this system. The main role of ACE is the conversion of angiotensin I (Ang-I) into angiotensin II (Ang-II), allowing vasoconstriction and positive regulation of blood pressure [18,19]. The role of ACE2 is the conversion of angiotensin I into angiotensin 1-9 (Ang 1–9), which is converted by ACE into the angiotensin vasodilator peptide 1–7 (Ang 1–7); ACE2 also regulates the conversion of Ang-II into Ang 1–7, and a negative regulation of blood pressure occurs [19].Because it is a multifactorial and complex process, affected individual must present 3 or more associated clinical characteristics, and for a better understanding of the processes that trigger metabolic syndrome, the next sections clarify the clinical characteristics involved and how they are related to SARS-CoV-2.3.1. ObesityThe immune system plays an important role in inflammation that occurs in adipose tissue due to obesity, which increases vulnerability to infections. Inflammation in adipose tissue generates metabolic alterations that can cause comorbidities such as dyslipidemia, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases and diabetes, thus increasing the risk of infection by SARS-CoV-2[2].The overexpression of inflammatory adipokines from visceral fat deposits can affect the immune response, impair chemotaxis and alter the differentiation of macrophages. The imbalance between the secretion of anti- and pro-inflammatory adipokines from thoracic visceral fat deposits, such as the epicardium and mediastinal, may also play a role in the cytokine storm described in patients with severe SARS-CoV-2. A study demonstrated the active role of macrophages in morbid obesity and the relationship they have with inflammatory processes, concluding that the disease of chronic inflammation initiated in adipose tissue is a consequence of insulin resistance [20].Hyperleptinemia, tissue dysfunction, low antioxidant defenses, chronic inflammation, and the generation of postprandial ROS are factors involved in the development of obesity in which oxidative stress participates [21]. As the increase in oxidative stress in accumulated fat is, at least in part, the underlying cause of adipocytokine dysregulation and the development of the metabolic syndrome [22], it is known that obesity induces oxidative stress through various mechanisms such as chronic inflammation, endothelial dysfunction, and mitochondrial dysfunction [23]. Interestingly, it was reported that adiponectin predicted mortality in critically ill patients after admission to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). The innate inflammatory response of visceral fat deposits can cause a positive regulation and greater release of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 [24].In addition, adipose tissue serves as a reservoir for several viruses, such as influenza A, HIV and cytomegalovirus, and may also be infected by the COVID-19 virus [2], for being an important source of IL-6 and its receptor, IL-6R. Therefore, adipose tissue can serve as a reservoir for the activation of IL-6 and cascade signaling of viral infection. The spread of viruses from organs affected by adjacent adipose tissue can take days, with prolonged viral shedding also contributing to the delay of the cytokine storm and consequent tissue damage in patients with COVID-19 [25,26].3.2. Diabetes mellitusDiabetes mellitus (DM) is a major risk factor for severity and mortality in individuals infected by SARS-CoV-2. Similar risk evidence among people with diabetes has been reported for the previous two CoV infections, SARS in 2002 MERS in 2012 [27]. Studies have associated diabetes with greater weight loss and increased lung inflammation with macrophage infiltrates similar to those observed in the disease [27]. The risk of infections in patients with diabetes can be reduced, although it cannot be completely eliminated, by good glycemic control. For all people with diabetes (over 2 years old) pneumococci and annual vaccination against influenza are recommended. In addition, patients with diabetes have a serious disease when infected with respiratory infections. In fact, diabetes was seen as an important risk factor for mortality in patients infected with pandemic influenza (H1N1) in 2009, SARS-CoV and MERS-SCoV [28]. Glycemic homeostasis requires close quantitative and temporal regulation of glucose flow through different organs. Most of the circulating glucose in the body is in a stable configuration, similar to the biochemical characteristics of the cell wall from commensal bacteria found in the individual [29]. In the immune system, host-pathogen and host-host interactions take place through the recognition and binding of oligosaccharides in so-called C type lectin receptors (CLRs), which will induce a specific immune response. Several C type lectins recognize oligosaccharides rich in sugars such as mannose and fucose, which have a similar chemical structure to glucose [30], as SARS-CoV-2 recognition is through protein S, a glycoprotein, it may as well increase inflammatory processes [12]. In addition, the connection of SARS-CoV-2 with ACE2 in people with uncontrolled hyperglycemia may be important in COVID-19 pathogenesis. Possible changes in ACE2 glycosylation, as well as viral peak protein (S) glycosylation, both possibly induced by uncontrolled hyperglycemia, may alter both virus binding to ACE2 and immune response intensity against the virus [31].3.3. HypertensionThiazide-type diuretics, calcium channel blockers (CCB), β-blockers, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) and angiotensin II type I receptor blockers (ARB) are antihypertensive drugs with distinct targets to lower blood pressure. The ACEi and ARB drugs targets the Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) and are also used in diabetes treatment, leading to an increased ACE2 expression that has been suggested by Fang [32] as risk increaser for severity of COVID-19, since SARS-CoV-2 uses ACE2 to enter the cells. In contrast, the study by Meng [33], in a hypertensive Chinese population with COVID-19 under treatment with ACEi/ARB drugs, displayed an attenuated inflammatory response. By inhibiting IL-6 cytokine levels they achieved a better clinical result: higher CD3+ and CD8++ T cell counts in peripheral blood and lower viral load peak in comparison to other antihypertensive drugs. In addition, during hospitalization, 12 patients from the non-ACEi/ARB group (48%) were considered severe and one patient died versus ACEi/ARB group with 4 severe patients (23.5%) and no deaths. Therefore, there is no evidence that increased ACE2 expression by these drugs is indeed harmful, and further studies are needed to clarify their effects on COVID-19 infection. Also, the IL-6 controlled levels leading to better clinical results showed that an equilibrated inflammatory response is determining a better outcome for COVID-19 disease.3.4. Cytokine stormIt has been reported that patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19 present the cytokine storm (CS) phenomenon, an uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. CS can be triggered by infectious diseases, rheumatic diseases, and tumor immunotherapy, and it generally presents as systemic inflammation, and multiple organ failure [34]. Among the consequences of CS on lung viral infections are epithelial and endothelial cell apoptosis, resulting in vascular leakage and alveolar edema ultimately leading to hypoxia; impaired T cell response, accumulation of alternatively activated macrophages, changed tissue homeostasis, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), the last being a primary cause of death in SARS-CoV/MERS-CoV patients [35]. The levels of inflammatory factors were measured in a study reported by Huang [36], including 41 COVID-19 patients (13 ICU and 28 non-ICU patients). IL-1B, IL-1RA, IL-7, IL-8, IL-9, IL-10, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), interferon-γ (IFNγ), interferon-γ-inducible protein (IP10), monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha (MIP1A), tumor necrosis factor (TNFα), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and others inflammatory factors were increased in both ICU and non-ICU patients compared to healthy adults. ICU patients showed higher concentrations of GCSF, IP10, MCP1, MIP1A, and TNFα than non-ICU patients, suggesting that the cytokine storm was associated with higher disease severity. A retrospective cohort study conducted by Zhou [37] reported elevated IL-6 blood levels in non-survivors compared with survivors throughout the clinical course of COVID-19 illness. Other studies also reported IL-6 increased levels in patients with severe COVID-19 [[38], [39], [40]]. In Anhui, China, a clinical trial (ChiCTR2000029765) using the IL-6 receptor-targeted monoclonal antibody (mAb) tocilizumab, reported improvement of respiratory function and rapid fever control in 21 patients with severe COVID-19. All patients recovered and were discharged from hospital, including two who were in critical condition [41]. This indicates the need of targeting anti-inflammatory strategies to the treatment of COVID-19 and demonstrates that a balanced immune host response is crucial to eliminate SARS-CoV-2 infection successfully.3.5. Vitamin D and immune responseGiven the need for a balanced immune response, vitamin D stands out. Its action is mediated by binding its active form 1-α-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (VD3) to its receptor, VDR, expressed in several immune cells [42,43]. VD3 has a genomic binding site (VDR-GP), in which a transcriptional complex is formed modulating the expression of genes such as ACE and the VDR itself [42]. According to Sassi [42], individuals with respiratory infections and sepsis had exacerbated symptoms and reduced VD3 levels. When using VD3 as an experimental treatment protocol in patients with respiratory infections, it was observed infection reduction and modulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β and IL-6, which are produced by helper (Th)1 cells [42]. Besides on acting on the immune system, this hormone plays an important role in metabolic disorders such as the pathophysiology of diabetes, modulating the expression of insulin and reducing systemic inflammation; regulating blood pressure by renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS); and in obesity, regulating adipogenesis and the production and release of adipokines and cytokines. As VD3 is connected to various metabolic pathways and immune system response, it becomes important to identify it as a therapeutic target [43].
4. Conclusion|Individuals with cardiometabolic diseases are more prone to SARS-CoV-2 infection due to immune response dysregulation, as the inflammatory response does not occur immediately. The role of medications generally used by individuals affected with diabetes, hypertension or other cardiovascular diseases, especially ACE inhibitors is debatable since those drugs lead to ACE2 receptor overexpression, associated to SARS-CoV-2 cell’s entry. After virus entry into the cell, it multiplies until reaches many copies, generating a more acute and late inflammatory response. Thus, a storm of cytokines occurs that end up harming healthy cells. In order to regulate inflammation and reduce damage to healthy cells, VD can modulate a favorable immune response and could hypothetically reduce levels of associated complications.
Author’s contributions|Ms. Thays Maria Costa de Lucena (TMCL) conceived this mini-review and along with Ms. Ariane Fernandes da Silva Santos (AFSS) and Ms. Brenda Regina de Lima (BRL) carried out all the necessary scientific literature research and wrote the entire body of the text. Subsequently to MsC. Maria Eduarda de Albuquerque Borborema (MEAB) and PhD. Jaqueline de Azevêdo Silva (JAS), discussed the content, revised and adjusted the written material.
Abstract|Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a newly emerged coronavirus that is responsible for the current pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which has resulted in more than 3.7 million infections and 260,000 deaths as of 6 May 20201,2. Vaccine and therapeutic discovery efforts are paramount to curb the pandemic spread of this zoonotic virus. The SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) glycoprotein promotes entry into host cells and is the main target of neutralizing antibodies. Here we describe several monoclonal antibodies that target the S glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2, which we identified from memory B cells of an individual who was infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in 2003. One antibody (named S309) potently neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV pseudoviruses as well as authentic SARS-CoV-2, by engaging the receptor-binding domain of the S glycoprotein. Using cryo-electron microscopy and binding assays, we show that S309 recognizes an epitope containing a glycan that is conserved within the Sarbecovirus subgenus, without competing with receptor attachment. Antibody cocktails that include S309 in combination with other antibodies that we identified further enhanced SARS-CoV-2 neutralization, and may limit the emergence of neutralization-escape mutants. These results pave the way for using S309 and antibody cocktails containing S309 for prophylaxis in individuals at a high risk of exposure or as a post-exposure therapy to limit or treat severe disease.
Main|The entry of coronaviruses into host cells is mediated by the transmembrane S glycoprotein, which forms homotrimers that protrude from the viral surface3. The S glycoprotein comprises two functional subunits: S1 (divided into A, B, C and D domains), which is responsible for binding to host-cell receptors; and S2, which promotes fusion of the viral and cellular membranes4,5. Both SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV belong to the Sarbecovirus subgenus and their S glycoproteins share 80% amino acid sequence identity6. SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein is closely related to the bat SARS-related coronavirus RaTG13 S, with which it shares 97.2% amino acid sequence identity1. It has recently been demonstrated that, in humans, angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a functional receptor for SARS-CoV-2, as also is the case for SARS-CoV1,6,7,8. Domain B of subunit S1 (SB) is the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the S glycoprotein, and binds to ACE2 with high affinity, which possibly contributed to the current rapid transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in humans6,9 as was previously proposed for SARS-CoV10.As the S glycoprotein of coronaviruses mediates entry into host cells, it is the main target of neutralizing antibodies and the focus of efforts to design therapeutic agents and vaccines3. The S-glycoprotein trimers are extensively decorated with N-linked glycans that are important for protein folding11 and modulate accessibility to host proteases and neutralizing antibodies12,13,14,15,16,17. Previous cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein in two distinct functional states6,9—along with cryo-EM and crystal structures of the SARS-CoV-2 SB in complex with ACE218,19,20—have revealed dynamic states of the SB domains, providing a blueprint for the design of vaccines and inhibitors of viral entry.Passive administration of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) could have a major effect on controlling the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic by providing immediate protection, complementing the development of prophylactic vaccines. Accelerated development of mAbs in a pandemic setting could be reduced to 5–6 months, compared to the traditional timeline of 10–12 months21. The recent finding that ansuvimab (mAb114) is a safe and effective treatment for symptomatic infection with Ebola virus is a notable example of the successful use of mAb therapy during an outbreak of infectious disease22,23. Potently neutralizing human mAbs from the memory B cells of individuals infected with SARS-CoV24 or Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)25 have previously been isolated. Passive transfer of these mAbs protected mice challenged with various SARS-CoV isolates and SARS-related coronaviruses24,26,27, as well as with MERS-CoV25. Structural characterization of two of these mAbs in complex with the S glycoprotein of SARS-CoV or MERS-CoV provided molecular-level information on the mechanisms of viral neutralization14. In particular, although both mAbs blocked SB attachment to the host receptor, the S230 mAb (which neutralizes SARS-CoV) acted by functionally mimicking attachment to the receptor and promoting fusogenic conformational rearrangements of the S glycoprotein14. Another mechanism of SARS-CoV neutralization has recently been described for mAb CR3022, which bound a cryptic epitope that is only accessible when at least two out of the three SB domains of a S-glycoprotein trimer were in the open conformation28,29. However, none of these mAbs neutralizes SARS-CoV-2. A mAb termed 47D11 that neutralizes SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 was also recently isolated from human-immunoglobulin transgenic mice30, and several mAbs have been isolated from individuals infected with SARS-CoV-231.
Identifying a SARS-CoV-2 cross-neutralizing mAb|A set of human neutralizing mAbs (from an individual infected with SARS-CoV in 2003) that potently inhibit both human and zoonotic SARS-CoV isolates has previously been identified24,26,32. To characterize the potential cross-reactivity of these antibodies with SARS-CoV-2, we performed a memory B cell screening using peripheral blood mononuclear cells collected in 2013 from the same patient. Here we describe 19 mAbs from the initial screen (2004 blood draw)24,26 and 6 mAbs from the new screen (2013 blood draw). The mAbs that we identified had a broad usage of V gene segments, and were not clonally related (Table 1). Eight out of the twenty-five mAbs bound to CHO cells that express SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein or SARS-CoV S glycoprotein, with half-maximal effective concentration values that ranged between 1.4 and 6,100 ng ml−1, and 0.8 and 254 ng ml−1, respectively (Fig. 1a, b). We further evaluated the mAbs for binding to the SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV SB domains, as well as to the prefusion-stabilized ectodomain trimers of human coronavirus HCoV-OC4333, MERS-CoV34,35, SARS-CoV35 and SARS-CoV-26 S glycoproteins. None of the mAbs that we studied bound to prefusion ectodomain trimers of the HCoV-OC43 or MERS-CoV S glycoproteins, which indicated a lack of cross-reactivity outside the Sarbecovirus subgenus (Extended Data Fig. 1). The mAbs S303, S304, S309 and S315 bound SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV RBDs with nano- to sub-picomolar affinity (Extended Data Fig. 2). In particular, the S309 IgG bound to the immobilized SARS-CoV-2 SB domain and to the ectodomain trimer of the S glycoprotein with sub-picomolar and picomolar avidities, respectively (Fig. 1c). The S309 Fab bound with nanomolar to sub-nanomolar affinities to both molecules (Fig. 1d). S306 and S310 stained cells that express SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein at higher levels than cells that express SARS-CoV S glycoprotein, yet these mAbs did not interact with ectodomain trimers and RBD constructs of SARS-CoV-2 or SARS-CoV S glycoprotein by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. These results suggest that S306 and S310 may recognize post-fusion SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein, which has recently been proposed to be abundant on the surface of authentic SARS-CoV-2 viruses36 (Fig. 1a, b, Extended Data Fig. 3).Table 1 Characteristics of the antibodies described in this studyFull size tableFig. 1: Identification of a potent SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing mAb from an individual infected with SARS-CoV.a, b, Binding of a panel of mAbs, isolated from a patient immune to SARS-CoV, to SARS-CoV-2 (a) or SARS-CoV (b) S glycoproteins expressed at the surface of expiCHO cells (symbols are means of duplicates from one experiment). c, d, Avidity and affinity measurement of S309 IgG1 (c) and Fab (d) for binding to immobilized SARS-CoV-2 SB domain (RBD) and to the prefusion ectodomain trimer of S glycoprotein, measured using biolayer interferometry. e, Neutralization of SARS-CoV-2–MLV, SARS-CoV–MLV (bearing S glycoprotein from various isolates) and the SARS-related coronavirus WIV-1 by mAb S309. Mean ± s.d. of triplicates is shown for all pseudoviruses, except for SARS-CoV-2 (mean of duplicates). f, Neutralization of authentic SARS-CoV-2 (strain n-CoV/USA_WA1/2020) by mAbs as measured by a focus-forming assay on Vero E6 cells. For the cocktail of S309 and S304, the concentration of S309 is as indicated in the x axis. S304 was added at a constant amount of 20 μg ml−1. Mean ± s.d. of quadruplicates is shown. In a, b, all mAbs in the same experiment were tested once. Individual mAbs were tested independently with similar results.In c–f, one representative out of two experiments with similar results is shown.Full size imageTo evaluate the neutralization potency of the SARS-CoV-2 cross-reactive mAbs, we carried out pseudovirus neutralization assays using a murine leukaemia virus (MLV) pseudotyping system37. S309 showed comparable neutralization potencies against both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 pseudoviruses, whereas S303 neutralized SARS-CoV–MLV but not SARS-CoV-2–MLV. S304 and S315 weakly neutralized SARS-CoV–MLV and SARS-CoV-2–MLV (Extended Data Fig. 4). In addition, S309 neutralized SARS-CoV–MLVs from isolates of the 3 phases of the 2002–2003 epidemic with half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values of between 120 and 180 ng ml−1, and partially neutralized the SARS-related coronavirus38 WIV-1 (Fig. 1e). Finally, mAb S309 potently neutralized authentic SARS-CoV-2 (2019n-CoV/USA_WA1/2020) with an IC50 of 79 ng ml−1 (Fig. 1f).
Structural basis of S309 cross-neutralization|To study the mechanisms of S309-mediated neutralization, we characterized the complex between the S309 Fab fragment and a prefusion stabilized ectodomain trimer of SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein6 using single-particle cryo-EM. Similar to a previous study of apo SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein6, 3D classification of the cryo-EM data enabled identification of two structural states: a trimer with one SB domain open, and a closed trimer. We determined 3D reconstructions at 3.7 Å and 3.1 Å resolution, respectively, of the ectodomain trimer of the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein with a single open SB domain and in a closed state (applying three-fold symmetry), both with three S309 Fabs bound (Fig. 2a–c, Extended Data Fig. 5a–f). In parallel, we also determined a crystal structure of the S309 Fab at 3.3 Å resolution to assist model building (Extended Data Fig. 5g). The S309 Fab bound to the open SB domain is weakly resolved in the cryo-EM map, owing to marked conformational variability of the upward pointing SB domain, and was not modelled in density. The analysis below is based on the closed-state structure.Fig. 2: Cryo-EM structures of the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein in complex with the S309 neutralizing mAb Fab fragment.a, Ribbon diagram of the partially open SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein trimer (one SB domain is open) bound to three S309 Fabs. The Fab bound to the open B domain is included only for visualization, and was omitted from the final model. b, c, Ribbon diagrams in two orthogonal orientations of the closed SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein trimer bound to three S309 Fabs. d, Close-up view of the S309 epitope, showing the contacts formed with the core fucose (labelled with a star) and the rest of the glycan at position N343. e, Close-up view of the S309 epitope, showing the 20-residue-long CDRH3 sitting atop the SB helix that comprises residues 337–344. The oligosaccharide at position N343 is omitted for clarity. In a–e, only the Fab variable domains are shown. In d, e, selected residues involved in interactions between S309 and SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein are shown. f, Molecular surface representation of the SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein trimer, showing the S309 epitope on one protomer coloured by residue conservation among SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV S glycoproteins. The other two protomers are coloured pink and gold.Full size imageS309 recognizes a proteoglycan epitope on the SARS-CoV-2 SB, distinct from the receptor-binding motif. The epitope is accessible in both the open and closed states of the S glycoprotein, which explains the stoichiometric binding of Fab to the trimer of the S glycoprotein (Fig. 2a–c). The S309 paratope is composed of all 6 complementarity-determining region (CDR) loops, which bury a surface area of about 1,150 Å2 at the interface with SB through electrostatic interactions and hydrophobic contacts. The 20-residue-long CDRH3 sits atop the SB helix that comprises residues 337–344, and also contacts the edge of the SB 5-stranded β-sheet (residues 356–361), overall accounting for about 50% of the buried surface area (Fig. 2d, e). CDRL1 and CDRL2 extend the epitope by interacting with the helix that spans residues 440–444, which is located near the three-fold molecular axis of the S glycoprotein. CDRH3 and CDRL2 sandwich the glycan of the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein at position N343, through contacts with the core fucose moiety (consistent with a previous study that detected SARS-CoV-2 N343 core-fucosylated peptides by mass spectrometry16) and to a lesser extent with the other saccharides within the glycan chain (Fig. 2d). These interactions between S309 and the glycan bury an average surface of about 300 Å2 and stabilize the N343 oligosaccharide, which is resolved to a much larger extent than in structures of the apo SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein6,9.The structural data explain the S309 cross-reactivity between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV, as 17 out of 22 residues of the epitope are strictly conserved (Fig. 2f, Extended Data Fig. 6a, b). R346, N354, R357 and L441 of SARS-CoV-2 are conservatively substituted for K333, E341, K344 (except for SARS-CoV isolate GZ02, in which this is R444) and I428, respectively, of SARS-CoV, and the K444 of SARS-CoV-2 is semi-conservatively substituted for T431 of SARS-CoV, in agreement with the comparable binding affinities of S309 to SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein (Fig. 1c). The oligosaccharide at position N343 is also conserved in both viruses and corresponds to SARS-CoV N330, for which core-fucosylated glycopeptides were previously detected by mass spectrometry14 that would allow for similar interactions with the S309 Fab. Analysis of the S glycoprotein sequences of the 11,839 SARS-CoV-2 isolates reported to date indicates that the epitope residues are conserved in all but 4 isolates, for which we found N354D or the S359N substitutions that are not expected to affect recognition by S309 (Extended Data Fig. 7a, b). Furthermore, S309 contact residues are highly conserved across human and animal isolates of clade 1, 2 and 3 sarbecoviruses39 (Extended Data Fig. 7c). Collectively, our data suggest that S309 could neutralize potentially all SARS-CoV-2 isolates known to be circulating to date, and possibly many other zoonotic sarbecoviruses. The degree of conservation is consistent with the moderate rates of evolution of SARS-CoV-2, estimated at about 1.8 × 10−3 substitutions per site per year40. On the basis of more than 104 viral sequences analysed to date, an estimated 112 residues are under positive selection (8 in the S glycoprotein) and 18 are under negative selection (1 in the S glycoprotein) in a genome of nearly 30 kb41. These observations are consistent with the fact that Coronaviridae is a family of RNA viruses with unusually high replication fidelity required by their exceptionally large genomes42.
Mechanism of S309-mediated neutralization|The cryo-EM structure of S309 bound to SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein presented here, combined with the structures of SARS-CoV-2 SB and SARS-CoV SB in complex with ACE2, indicate18,19,20,43 that the Fab engages an epitope distinct from the receptor-binding motif and would not clash with ACE2 upon binding to S glycoprotein (Fig. 3a). Biolayer interferometry analysis of S309 Fab or IgG binding to the SARS-CoV-2 SB domain or the ectodomain trimer of S glycoprotein confirmed the absence of competition between S309 and ACE2 for binding to the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 8).Fig. 3: Mechanism of S309 neutralization.a, Ribbon diagrams of S309 and ACE2 bound to SARS-CoV-2 SB. This composite model was generated using the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein–S309 cryo-EM structure reported here, and a previously published crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 SB bound to ACE220. Only the Fab variable domains are shown. b, Competition of S309 or S230 mAbs with ACE2 to bind to SARS-CoV SB (left) and SARS-CoV-2 SB (right). The vertical dashed line indicates the start of the association of mAb-complexed or free SB to solid-phase ACE2. Each mAb was tested in at least two experiments with similar results. c, Neutralization of SARS-CoV–MLV by S309 recombinant (r)IgG1 or S309 Fab, plotted in nM. Mean of duplicates is shown; the experiment was repeated with similar results. d, mAb-mediated ADCC using primary natural killer effector cells and SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein-expressing expiCHO as target cells. Bars show the average area under the curve (AUC) for the responses of 3 (VV) (left) or 4 (FF-FV) (right) donors genotyped for their FcγRIII. Mean ± s.d., data were pooled from two independent experiments. e, Activation of high-affinity (V158) (left) or low-affinity (F158) (right) FcγRIIIa was measured using Jurkat reporter cells and SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein-expressing expiCHO as target cells. RLU, relative luminescence unit. f, mAb-mediated ADCP using Cell-Trace-Violet-labelled peripheral blood mononuclear cells as phagocytic cells, and PKF67-labelled SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein-expressing expiCHO as target cells. Bars show the AUC for the responses of four donors. Mean ± s.d., data were pooled from two independent experiments. g, Activation of FcγRIIa (131H) measured using Jurkat reporter cells and SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein-expressing expiCHO as target cells. In e and g, one experiment, symbols show means of duplicates per mAb dilution except for S304, S230 and S315 (one data point per dilution). S309 was retested in an independent experiment with similar results.Full size imageTo further investigate the mechanism of S309-mediated neutralization, we compared side-by-side infection of SARS-CoV-2–MLV in the presence of either S309 Fab or S309 IgG. Both experiments yielded comparable IC50 values (3.8 and 3.5 nM, respectively), indicating similar potencies for IgG and Fab (Fig. 3c). However, S309 IgG-mediated neutralization reached 100%, whereas neutralization plateaued at about 80% in the presence of S309 Fab (Fig. 3c). This result indicates that one or more IgG-specific bivalent mechanisms—such as S-glycoprotein trimer cross-linking, steric hindrance or aggregation of virions44—may contribute to the ability of S309 to fully neutralize pseudovirions.Fc-dependent effector mechanisms, such as antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity (ADCC) mediated by natural killer cells, can contribute to viral control in individuals infected with virus. We observed efficient S309- and S306-mediated ADCC of SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein-transfected cells, whereas the other mAbs that we tested showed limited or no activity (Fig. 3d, Extended Data Fig. 9a). These findings might be related to distinct binding orientations and/or positioning of the mAb Fc fragment relative to the FcγRIIIa receptors. ADCC was observed only using natural killer (effector) cells that express the high-affinity FcγRIIIa variant (V158) but not the low-affinity variant (F158) (Fig. 3d). These results, which we confirmed using a FcγRIIIa cell reporter assay (Fig. 3e), suggest that S309 Fc engineering could potentially enhance the activation of natural killer cells with the low-affinity FcγRIIIa variant (F158)45. Antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis (ADCP), mediated by macrophages or dendritic cells, can contribute to viral control by clearing virus and infected cells and by stimulating a T cell response via presentation of viral antigens46,47. Similar to the ADCC results, the mAbs S309 and S306 showed the strongest ADCP response (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 9b). However, FcγRIIa signalling was observed only for S309 (Fig. 3g). These findings suggest that ADCP by monocytes was dependent on engagement of both FcγRIIIa and FcγRIIa. Collectively, these results demonstrate that—in addition to potent in vitro neutralization—S309 may leverage additional protective mechanisms in vivo, as has previously been shown for other antiviral antibodies48,49. Although the risks of antibody-dependent disease enhancement will need to be evaluated for SARS-CoV-2, potent virus neutralization by a specific monoclonal antibody or by antibody cocktails is expected to limit this possibility, compared to weakly neutralizing antibodies that might potentially be induced upon vaccination or infection50. Furthermore, neutralizing antibodies are associated with reduced susceptibility to re-infection or disease in humans51,52,53. Regardless, the possibility of antibody-dependent disease enhancement will need to be assessed during clinical trials for either antibodies or vaccines.
Enhancing SARS-CoV-2 neutralization|To gain more insight into the epitopes recognized by our panel of mAbs, we used structural information, escape mutant analysis26,32,35 and biolayer-interferometry-based epitope binning to map the antigenic sites that are present on the SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 SB domains (Fig. 4a, Extended Data Fig. 10). This analysis identified at least four antigenic sites within the SB domain of SARS-CoV targeted by our panel of mAbs. The receptor-binding motif, which is targeted by S230, S227 and S110, is termed site I. Sites II and III are defined by S315 and S124, respectively, and the two sites were bridged by mAb S304. Site IV is defined by the S309, S109 and S303 mAbs. Given the lower number of mAbs that cross-react with SARS-CoV-2, we were able to identify site IV targeted by S309 and S303, and sites II and III targeted by S304 and S315 (Fig. 4b).Fig. 4: mAb cocktails enhance SARS-CoV-2 neutralization.a, Heat map showing the competition of mAb pairs for binding to the SARS-CoV SB domain as measured by biolayer interferometry (as shown in Extended Data Fig. 10). b, Competition of mAb pairs for binding to the SARS-CoV-2 SB domain. Each competition measured once. In a, b, a coloured box indicates competition and each colour corresponds to an antigenic site. c, d, Neutralization of SARS-CoV-2–MLV by S309 combined with an equimolar amount of S304 or S315 mAb. For mAb cocktails, the concentration on the x axis is that of the total amount of mAb per dilution. Mean of duplicates is shown. Both experiments were repeated with similar results.Full size imageOn the basis of these findings, we evaluated the neutralization potency of the site-IV S309 mAb in combination with either the site-II S315 mAb or the site-II and site-III S304 mAb. Although S304 and S315 alone were weakly neutralizing, the combination of either of these mAbs with S309 resulted in an enhanced neutralization potency, compared to single mAbs, against both SARS-CoV-2–MLV and authentic SARS-CoV-2 (Figs. 1f, 4c, d). A synergistic effect between two non-competing anti-RBD mAbs has previously been reported for SARS-CoV54 and our data extend this observation to SARS-CoV-2, providing a proof-of-concept for the use of mAb combinations to prevent or control SARS-CoV-2.In summary, our study identifies S309 as a human mAb that has broad neutralizing activity against multiple sarbecoviruses (including SARS-CoV-2), via recognition of a highly conserved epitope in the SB domain that comprises the N343 glycan (N330 in SARS-CoV S glycoprotein). Furthermore, S309 can recruit effector mechanisms and showed increased neutralization in combination with weakly neutralizing mAbs, which may mitigate the risk of viral escape. Our data indicate the potential to discover potently neutralizing pan-sarbecovirus mAbs, define antigenic sites to include in vaccine design and pave the way to support preparedness for future outbreaks of sarbecoviruses. As S309 shows promise as an effective countermeasure to the COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2, Fc variants of S309 with increased half-life and effector functions have entered an accelerated development path towards clinical trials.
Methods|No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.Cell linesCell lines used in this study were obtained from ATCC (HEK293T, Vero-E6, Vero CCL81 cells) or Invitrogen (Expi-CHO cells). All cell lines used in this study were routinely tested for mycoplasma and found to be mycoplasma-free.Ethics statementDonors provided written informed consent for the use of blood and blood components (such as sera), following approval by the Canton Ticino Ethics Committee (Switzerland).Antibody discovery and expressionmAbs were isolated from Epstein–Barr-virus-immortalized memory B cells. Recombinant antibodies were expressed in expiCHO cells transiently cotransfected with plasmids expressing the heavy and light chain, as previously described55. The mAbs S303, S304, S306, S309, S310 and S315 were expressed as recombinant IgG-LS antibodies. The LS mutation confers a longer half-life in vivo56. Antibodies S110 and S124 tested in Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1 were purified mAbs produced from immortalized B cells.Transient expression of recombinant SARS-CoV-2 protein and flow cytometryThe full-length S gene of SARS-CoV-2 strain (SARS-CoV-2-S) isolate BetaCoV/Wuhan-Hu-1/2019 (accession number MN908947) was codon-optimized for human cell expression and cloned into the phCMV1 expression vector (Genlantis). Expi-CHO cells were transiently transfected with phCMV1-SARS-CoV-2-S, SARS-spike_pcDNA-3.1 (strain SARS) or empty phCMV1 (mock) using Expifectamine CHO Enhancer. Two days after transfection, cells were collected for immunostaining with mAbs. An Alexa-647-labelled secondary antibody anti-human IgG Fc was used for detection. Binding of mAbs to transfected cells was analysed by flow cytometry using a ZE5 Cell Analyzer (Biorard) and FlowJo software (TreeStar). Positive binding was defined by differential staining of CoV-S-glycoprotein transfectants versus mock transfectants.Affinity and avidity determination and competition experiments using Octet (biolayer interferometry)For affinity and avidity determination of IgG1 compared to Fab fragment, biotinylated RBD of SARS-CoV-2 (produced in house; residues 331–550 of S glycoprotein from BetaCoV/Wuhan-Hu-1/2019, accession number MN908947, biotinylated with EZ-Link NHS–PEG4–biotin from ThermoFisher) and biotinylated SARS-CoV-2 2P S glycoprotein avi-tagged were loaded at 7.5 μg/ml in kinetics buffer (0.01% endotoxin-free BSA, 0.002% Tween-20, 0.005% NaN3 in PBS) for 8 min onto streptavidin biosensors (Molecular Devices, ForteBio). Association of IgG1 and Fab was performed in kinetics buffer at 100, 33, 11, 3.6, 1.2 nM for 5 min. Dissociation in kinetics buffer was measured for 10 min. Kd values were calculated using a 1:1 global fit model (Octet).Alternatively, measurement of apparent Kd for IgGs was determined using protein A biosensors (Pall ForteBio) that were loaded with different mAbs at 2.7 μg/ml for 1 min, after a hydration step for 10 min in kinetics buffer. Association curves were recorded for 5 min by incubating the mAb-coated sensors with different concentrations of SARS-CoV RBD (Sino Biological) or SARS-CoV-2 RBD (produced in house; residues 331–550 of S glycoprotein from BetaCoV/Wuhan-Hu-1/2019, accession number MN908947). The highest RBD concentration was 10 μg/ml, then serially diluted 1:2.5. Dissociation was recorded for 9 min by moving the sensors to wells containing kinetics buffer. Kd values were calculated using a global fit model (Octet). Octet Red96 (ForteBio) equipment was used.For mAb competition experiments, His-tagged RBD of SARS-CoV or SARS-CoV-2 was loaded for 5 min at 3 μg/ml in kinetics buffer onto anti-Penta-HIS (HIS1K) biosensors (Molecular Devices, ForteBio). Association of mAbs was performed in kinetics buffer at 15 μg/ml.For ACE2 competition experiments, ACE2–His (Bio-Techne AG) was loaded for 30 min at 5 μg/ml in kinetics buffer onto anti-HIS (HIS2) biosensors (Molecular Devices-ForteBio).SARS-CoV RBD–rabbit Fc or SARS-CoV-2 RBD–mouse Fc (Sino Biological Europe GmbH) at 1 μg/ml was associated for 15 min, after preincubation with or without antibody (30 μg/ml, 30 min). Dissociation was monitored for 5 min.Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assayThe following proteins were coated on 96-well enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay plates at the following concentrations: SARS-CoV RBD (Sino Biological, 40150-V08B1) at 1 μg/ml, SARS-CoV-2 RBD (produced in house) at 10 μg/ml, ectodomains (stabilized prefusion trimer) of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, HCoV-OC43 and MERS-CoV, all at 1 μg/ml. After blocking with 1% BSA in PBS, antibodies were added to the plates at concentrations between 5 and 0.000028 μg/ml and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Plates were washed and secondary antibody Goat Anti Human IgG-AP (Southern Biotechnology: 2040-04) was added. Substrate p-nitrophenyl pPhosphate (pNPP) (Sigma-Aldrich 71768) was used for colour development. Optical density at 405 nm was read on an ELx808IU plate reader (Biotek).Measurement of Fc-mediated effector functionsADCC assays were performed using expiCHO cells transiently transfected with SARS-CoV or SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein as targets. Natural killer cells were isolated from fresh blood of healthy donors using the MACSxpress NK Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec, cat. no. 130-098-185). Target cells were incubated with titrated concentrations of mAbs for 10 min and were then incubated with primary human natural killer cells as effector cells at an effector:target ratio of 9:1. ADCC was measured using LDH release assay (Cytotoxicity Detection Kit (LDH) (Roche; cat. no. 11644793001)) after 4 h incubation at 37 °C.ADCP assays were performed using expiCHO target cells transiently transfected with SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein and fluorescently labelled with PKH67 Fluorescent Cell Linker Kits (Sigma Aldrich, cat. no. MINI67). Target cells were incubated with titrated concentrations of mAbs for 10 min, followed by incubation with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolated from healthy donors and fluorescently labelled with Cell Trace Violet (Invitrogen, cat. no. C34557). An effector:target ratio of 20:1 was used. After an overnight incubation at 37 °C, cells were stained with anti-human CD14-APC antibody (BD Pharmingen, cat. no. 561708, Clone M5E2) to stain monocytes. Antibody-mediated phagocytosis was determined by flow cytometry, gating on CD14+ cells that were double-positive for cell trace violet and PKH67.Determination of mAb-dependent activation of human FcγRIIIa or FcγRIIa was performed using expiCHO cells transiently transfected with SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein (BetaCoV/Wuhan-Hu-1/2019). Cells were incubated with titrated concentrations of mAbs for 10 min before incubation with FcγRIIIa-receptor- or FcγRIIa-expressing Jurkat cells stably transfected with NFAT-driven luciferase gene (Promega, cat. no. G9798 and G7018). An effector-to-target ratio of 6:1 for FcγRIIIa and 5:1 for FcγRIIa was used. Activation of human FcγR in this bioassay results in the NFAT-mediated expression of a luciferase reporter gene. Luminescence was measured after 21 h of incubation at 37 °C with 5% CO2, using the Bio-Glo-TM Luciferase Assay Reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Pseudovirus neutralization assaysMLV-based SARS-CoV S-glycoprotein-pseudotyped viruses were prepared as previously described6,37. HEK293T cells were cotransfected with a SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, CUHK, GZ02 or WiV1 S-glycoprotien-encoding-plasmid, an MLV Gag-Pol packaging construct and the MLV transfer vector encoding a luciferase reporter using the Lipofectamine 2000 transfection reagent (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were incubated for 5 h at 37 °C with 8% CO2 with OPTIMEM transfection medium. DMEM containing 10% FBS was added for 72 h.VeroE6 cells or DBT cells transfected with human ACE2 were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 1% penicillin–streptomycin and plated into 96-well plates for 16–24 h. Concentrated pseudovirus with or without serial dilution of antibodies was incubated for 1 h and then added to the wells after washing 3× with DMEM. After 2–3 h DMEM containing 20% FBS and 2% penicillin–streptomycin was added to the cells for 48 h. Following 48 h of infection, One-Glo-EX (Promega) was added to the cells and incubated in the dark for 5–10 min before reading on a Varioskan LUX plate reader (ThermoFisher). Measurements were done in duplicate and relative luciferase units were converted to per cent neutralization and plotted with a nonlinear regression curve fit in PRISM.Live virus neutralization assaySARS-CoV-2 strain 2019-nCoV/USA_WA1/2020 was obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (gift of N. Thornburg). Virus was passaged once in Vero CCL81 cells (ATCC) and titrated by focus-forming assay on Vero E6 cells. Serial dilutions of the indicated mAbs were incubated with 102 focus-forming units of SARS-CoV-2 for 1 h at 37 °C. Mab–virus complexes were added to Vero E6 cell monolayers in 96-well plates and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Subsequently, cells were overlaid with 1% (w/v) methylcellulose in MEM supplemented with 2% FBS. Plates were collected 30 h later by removing overlays and fixed with 4% PFA in PBS for 20 min at room temperature. Plates were washed and sequentially incubated with 1 μg/ml of CR302257 anti-S-glycoprotein antibody and HRP-conjugated goat anti-human IgG in PBS supplemented with 0.1% saponin and 0.1% BSA. SARS-CoV-2-infected cell foci were visualized using TrueBlue peroxidase substrate (KPL) and quantified on an ImmunoSpot microanalyzer (Cellular Technologies). Data were processed using Prism software (GraphPad Prism 8.0).Recombinant S-glycoprotein ectodomain and SB productionThe SARS-CoV-2 2P S glycoprotein (GenBank: YP_009724390.1) ectodomain was produced in 500-ml cultures of HEK293F cells grown in suspension using FreeStyle 293 expression medium (Life technologies) at 37 °C in a humidified 8% CO2 incubator rotating at 130 r.p.m., as previously reported6. The culture was transfected using 293fectin (ThermoFisher Scientific) with cells grown to a density of 106 cells per ml and cultivated for 3 d. The supernatant was collected and cells were resuspended for another three days, yielding two collections. Clarified supernatants were purified using a 5-ml Cobalt affinity column (Takara). Purified protein was concentrated and flash-frozen in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris pH 8.0 and 150 mM NaCl before cryo-EM analysis. The SARS-CoV-2 2P S-glycoprotein-avi, SARS-CoV S glycoprotein, HCoV-OC43 S glycoprotein and MERS-CoV S glycoprotein constructs have previously been described14,33 and were produced similarly to SARS-CoV-2 2P S glycoprotein.Cryo-EM sample preparation and data collectionThree microlitres of SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein at 1.6 mg/ml was mixed with 0.45 μl of S309 Fab (obtained by LysC fragmentation of S309 IgG) at 7.4 mg/ml for 1 min at room temperature before application onto a freshly glow-discharged 1.2/1.3 UltraFoil grid (300 mesh). Plunge freezing used a vitrobot MarkIV (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a blot force of 0 and 6.5 s blot time at 100% humidity and 25 °C. Data were acquired using the Leginon software58 to control an FEI Titan Krios transmission electron microscope operated at 300 kV and equipped with a Gatan K2 Summit direct detector and Gatan Quantum GIF energy filter, operated in zero-loss mode with a slit width of 20 eV. Automated data collection was carried out using Leginon at a nominal magnification of 130,000× with a pixel size of 0.525 Å with tilt angles ranging between 20° and 50°, as previously described59. The dose rate was adjusted to 8 counts per pixel per s, and each movie was acquired in super-resolution mode fractionated in 50 frames of 200 ms. Three thousand nine hundred micrographs were collected in a single session with a defocus range of between −1.0 and −3.0 μm.Cryo-EM data processingMovie frame alignment, estimation of the microscope contrast-transfer function parameters, particle picking and extraction were carried out using Warp60. Particle images were extracted with a box size of 800 binned to 400, yielding a pixel size of 1.05 Å. For each dataset, two rounds of reference-free 2D classification were performed using cryoSPARC61 to select well-defined particle images. Subsequently, two rounds of 3D classification with 50 iterations each (angular sampling 7.5° for 25 iterations and 1.8° with local search for 25 iterations), using a previously reported closed SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein structure6 as initial model, were carried out using Relion62 without imposing symmetry to separate distinct SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein conformations. Three-dimensional refinements were carried out using non-uniform refinement along with per-particle defocus refinement in cryoSPARC61. Particle images were subjected to Bayesian polishing63 before performing another round of non-uniform refinement in cryoSPARC61, followed by per-particle defocus refinement and again non-uniform refinement. Reported resolutions are based on the gold-standard Fourier shell correlation of 0.143 criterion and Fourier shell correlation curves were corrected for the effects of soft masking by high-resolution noise substitution64.Cryo-EM model building and analysisUCSF Chimera65 and Coot were used to fit atomic models (Protein Data Bank codes (PDB) 6VXX and PDB 6VYB) into the cryo-EM maps. The Fab was subsequently manually built using Coot66,67. N-linked glycans were hand-built into the density where visible, and the models were refined and relaxed using Rosetta68. Glycan refinement relied on a dedicated Rosetta protocol, which uses physically realistic geometries based on prior knowledge of saccharide chemical properties69, and was aided by using both sharpened and unsharpened maps. Models were analysed using MolProbity70, EMringer71, Phenix72 and privateer73 to validate the stereochemistry of both the protein and glycan components. Figures were generated using UCSF ChimeraX74.Crystallization and X-ray structure determination of Fab S309Fab S309 crystals were grown in a hanging drop set up with a mosquito at 20 °C using 150 nl protein solution in Tris HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 150 nl mother liquor solution containing 1.1 M sodium malonate, 0.1 M HEPES, pH 7.0 and 0.5% (w/v) Jeffamine ED-2001. Crystals were cryo-protected using the mother liquor solution supplemented with 30% glycerol. The dataset was collected at ALS beamline 5.0.2 and processed to 3.3 Å resolution in space group P41212 using mosflm75 and Aimless76. The structure of Fab S309 was solved by molecular replacement using Phaser77 and homology models as search models. The coordinates were improved and completed using Coot66 and refined with REFMAC578. Crystallographic data collection and refinement statistics are shown in Extended Data Fig. 5g.Conservation analysisSARS-CoV-2 genomics sequences were downloaded from GISAID on 27 April 2020 (n = 11,839) using the ‘complete (>29,000 bp)’ and ‘low coverage exclusion’ filters. Bat and pangolin sequences were removed to yield human sequences only. The S glycoprotein ORF was localized by aligning the reference protein sequence (YP_009724390.1) to the genomic sequence of isolates with Exonerate v.2.4.0 (-m protein2dna --refine full --minintron 999999 --percent 30 --showalignment false --showvulgar false --ryo “>%ti\n%tcs). Coding nucleotide sequences were translated in silico using seqkit v.0.12.0. Multiple sequence alignment was performed using MAFFT v.7.455 (--amino–bl 80 --nomemsave --reorder --add spike_aa_sequences.fasta --keeplength reference_aa_sequence.fasta). Variants were determined by comparison of aligned sequences to the reference sequence using the R v3.6.3/Bioconductor v.3.10 package Biostrings v.2.54.0 (function: consensusMatrix). A similar strategy was used to extract and translate S glycoprotein sequences from SARS-CoV genomes sourced from ViPR (search criteria: SARS-related coronavirus, full-length genomes, human host, deposited before December 2019 to exclude SARS-CoV-2, n = 53, performed on 29 March 2020). We confirmed that sourced SARS-CoV genome sequences comprised all the major published strains (such as Urbani, Tor2, TW1, P2, and Frankfurt1, among others). Pangolin sequences79 were sourced from GISAID and bat sequences from the three clades of sarbecoviruses39 were downloaded from Genbank (civet (AY304486.1) and raccoon dog (AY304487.1). Full conservation analysis code is available at https://github.com/virbio/manuscript-cov2-pinto-conservation.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability|
The cryo-EM maps and atomic models have been deposited at the Electron Microscopy Data Bank and the PDB with accession codes EMD-21864 and 6WPS (closed SARS-CoV-2 S in complex with S309), as well as EMD-21865 and 6WPT (SARS-CoV-2 S with one SB open in complex with S309). The crystal structure of the S309 Fab was deposited to the PDB with accession code 6WS6. Materials generated in this study will be made available on request, but we may require a completed materials transfer agreement.

Acknowledgements|This study was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (R01GM120553, D.V.), the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (HHSN272201700059C to D.V. and 75N93019C00062 to M.S.D.)), a Pew Biomedical Scholars Award (D.V.), an Investigators in the Pathogenesis of Infectious Disease Award from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund (D.V.), the University of Washington Arnold and Mabel Beckman cryo-EM centre, the Pasteur Institute (M.A.T.) and beamline 5.0.2 at the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory. Beamline 5.0.2 is supported by The Berkeley Center for Structural Biology. The Advanced Light Source is a Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. We thank N. Zheng for use of his crystallization robot. We gratefully acknowledge the authors, originating and submitting laboratories of the sequences from GISAID’s EpiFlu Database upon which this research is based.
Author information|Author notesThese authors contributed equally: Dora Pinto, Young-Jun Park, Martina Beltramello, Alexandra C. WallsAffiliationsHumabs BioMed SA, Vir Biotechnology, Bellinzona, SwitzerlandDora Pinto, Martina Beltramello, Siro Bianchi, Stefano Jaconi, Katja Culap, Fabrizia Zatta, Anna De Marco, Alessia Peter, Barbara Guarino, Elisabetta Cameroni, Antonio Lanzavecchia, Katja Fink & Davide CortiDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USAYoung-Jun Park, Alexandra C. Walls, M. Alejandra Tortorici & David VeeslerInstitut Pasteur and CNRS UMR 3569, Unité de Virologie Structurale, Paris, FranceM. Alejandra TortoriciVir Biotechnology, San Francisco, CA, USARoberto Spreafico, Colin Havenar-Daughton, Gyorgy Snell, Amalio Telenti & Herbert W. VirginDepartment of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USAJames Brett Case, Rita E. Chen & Michael S. DiamondDepartment of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USARita E. Chen & Michael S. DiamondInstitute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera Italiana, Bellinzona, SwitzerlandAntonio LanzavecchiaDepartment of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USAMichael S. DiamondAuthorsDora PintoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarYoung-Jun ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMartina BeltramelloView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAlexandra C. WallsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarM. Alejandra TortoriciView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSiro BianchiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarStefano JaconiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKatja CulapView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarFabrizia ZattaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAnna De MarcoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAlessia PeterView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarBarbara GuarinoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarRoberto SpreaficoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarElisabetta CameroniView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJames Brett CaseView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarRita E. ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarColin Havenar-DaughtonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarGyorgy SnellView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAmalio TelentiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarHerbert W. VirginView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAntonio LanzavecchiaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMichael S. DiamondView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKatja FinkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarDavid VeeslerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarDavide CortiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsA.C.W., K.F., M.S.D., D.V. and D.C. designed the experiments. A.C.W., M.A.T., S.J. and E.C. expressed and purified the proteins. K.C., F.Z., S.J. and E.C. sequenced and expressed antibodies. D.P., M.B., A.C.W. and S.B. performed binding assays. D.P., M.B., A.C.W., A.P. and A.D.M. carried out pseudovirus neutralization assays. J.B.C. and R.E.C. performed neutralization assays with authentic SARS-CoV-2. B.G. performed effector function assays. Y.-J.P. prepared samples for cryo-EM and collected the data. Y.-J.P. and D.V. processed the data, built and refined the atomic models. A.C.W. crystallized the S309 Fab. Y.-J.P. collected and processed the X-ray diffraction data and built and refined the atomic model. R.S., A.T. and G.S. performed bioinformatic and conservation analysis. A.L. provided key reagents. A.C.W., K.F., C.H.-D., H.W.V., A.L., D.V. and D.C. analysed the data and prepared the manuscript with input from all authors.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                David Veesler or Davide Corti.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
D.P., S.B., K.C., E.C., C.H.-D., G.S., M.B., A.K., K.F., A.P., F.Z., S.J., B.G., A.D.M., A.L., A.T., H.W.V., R.S. and D.C. are employees of Vir Biotechnology and may hold shares in Vir Biotechnology. M.S.D. is a consultant for Inbios, Eli Lilly, Vir Biotechnology, NGM Biopharmaceuticals and Emergent BioSolutions, and on the Scientific Advisory Board of Moderna. The Diamond laboratory at Washington University School of Medicine has received sponsored research agreements from Moderna. The other authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information|Peer review information Nature thanks Pamela Bjorkman, Michel Nussenzweig and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Extended data figures and tables|Extended Data Fig. 1 Binding of cross-reactive antibodies to RBD of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, and to ectodomains of different coronavirus strains.mAbs were tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay at a concentration range of 5 to 0.00028 μg ml−1. S, stabilized prefusion trimer of the indicated coronavirus. Symbols show mean of duplicates. The full dataset was tested once. Binding of S309 to the RBDs and all S glycoproteins was repeated in an independent experiment with similar results.Extended Data Fig. 2 Antibody affinity and avidity of S309, S303, S304 and S315 to the RBD of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2.Antibodies were loaded to biolayer interferometry (BLI) pins via protein A for the measurement of association of different concentrations of the RBD of SARS-CoV-2 (blue) and SARS-CoV (red). Vertical dashed lines indicate the start of the dissociation phase, when BLI pins were switched to buffer. The experiments were done once for S303, S304 and S315. The experiment for S309 was repeated once.Extended Data Fig. 3 Binding of crossreactive mAbs to expiCHO cells transfected with SARS-CoV or SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein.Mean fluorescence intensity as measured in flow cytometry for each antibody. Antibody concentrations tested are indicated in the x axis.Extended Data Fig. 4 Neutralization of cross-reactive mAbs.a, b, The six cross-reactive mAbs indicated in the legend were tested for neutralization of SARS-CoV-2–MLV (a) and SARS-CoV–MLV (b). Symbols are mean of duplicates. a, One experiment. Neutralization of S304, S315 and S309 was tested in at least two independent experiments with similar results. b, One out of two experiments with similar results.Extended Data Fig. 5 Cryo-EM data processing and validation.a, b, Representative electron micrograph (a) and class averages (b) of SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein embedded in vitreous ice. Scale bar, 100 nm. c, Gold-standard (solid line) and map/model (dashed line) Fourier shell correlation curves for the closed (blue) and partially open trimers (red). The 0.143 and 0.5 cutoffs are indicated by horizontal grey dashed lines. d, e, Local-resolution maps calculated using cryoSPARC for the closed- (d) and open- (e) state reconstructions. f, Cryo-EM data collection, refinement and validation statistics. g, Data collection and refinement statistics for the S309 Fab X-ray structure.Extended Data Fig. 6 Conservation of spike and RBD residues.a, Alignment of the full RBD of multiple sarbecoviruses. The ACE2 and S309 footprints are highlighted in blue and magenta, respectively. Dashed boxes indicate glycosylation sites and orange asterisks indicate the N343 glycosylation site. b, ACE2 and S309 footprints mapped onto the structure of the SARS-CoV-2 RBD domain (PDB 6M0J). The ACE2 footprint was defined by residues being within 5 Å of the receptor in 6M0J. The highly conserved NAT glycosylation motif is shown in orange. c, The SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 differences are shown in green, and differences within the S309 footprint are shown in pink (right). The high-frequency RBD variants are shown in yellow (second from left; 4 out of 8 are visible). Red spheres indicate the position of the N343 glycan.Extended Data Fig. 7 Conservation of S glycoprotein and RBD residues.SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences retrieved from GISAID on 27 April 27 2020 (n = 11,839) were used to annotate variants of the S glycoprotein. Only variants supported by at least 2 sequences (prevalence greater than 0.01%) are shown. a, Residues with variants are rendered as red spheres mapped onto the closed and open form of the full trimeric ectodomain (n = 171). b, Variants are plotted by amino acid position. Each dot is a distinct variant. Colour encodes location (RBD, RBM or S309 epitope). Variants are labelled if their prevalence is greater than 1% (only D614G) or if they belong to the RBM or the S309 epitope. The location of conserved N343 is indicated. c, Conservation of residues making contact with S309 across clades of Sarbecovirus. Summary of residue variation observed in human and animal SARS-related coronaviruses, arranged by clades39. Residue coordinates for both SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV are shown. The NAT motif that directs glycosylation of N343 is highlighted in orange. Substitutions between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 residues are marked in pink. Dashes indicate identity to SARS-CoV-2 consensus residues. Blanks indicate deletions. When multiple variants are found, they are listed in order of prevalence (from high to low). When n > 10,000 (SARS-CoV-2), variants found in a single sequence are not shown, and variants found in 2 sequences only are parenthesized. For the 21 sequences of clade-3 bat CoV-2 from ref. 39 at most the top-3 variants at each position are shown. n, number of analysed sequences. IC50, half maximal neutralizing concentration of S309 against SARS-CoV-2–MLV or SARS-CoV.Extended Data Fig. 8 Competition of antibodies with RBD binding to ACE2.a, Human ACE2 (hACE2) was loaded onto BLI sensors, followed by incubation of the sensors with RBD alone or RBD in combination with recombinant antibodies. The vertical dashed line indicates the start of the loading of RBD with or without antibody. b, SARS-CoV-2 ectodomain was loaded onto BLI sensors, followed by incubation of the sensors with macaque ACE2 or S309 IgG (left) or Fab (right). In a third step, sensors were incubated with macaque ACE2 or S309 IgG or Fab as indicated. The experiments were conducted once.Extended Data Fig. 9 ADCC and ADCP data for one representative donor.This figure is related to Fig. 3. a, ADCC for one donor who is homozygous for high-affinity variant FcγRIIIa 158V (VV). Background signal of cells without antibody was deducted from all values before plotting. b, ADCP for one donor who is heterozygous for FcγRIIIa 158V (FV). The dashed line indicates the background signal for cells without antibody. Symbols are mean of duplicates. Cells from each donor were sufficient to conduct one experiment.Extended Data Fig. 10 Competition of mAb pairs for binding to the RBD domain of SARS-CoV, as determined by BLI (Octet).RBD was loaded on BLI pins. Association was measured first for antibodies indicated on the left of the matrix, followed by association of the antibodies indicated on top of the matrix. Each combination of antibodies was tested once.
Supplementary information|
Reporting Summary
Rights and permissions|Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articlePinto, D., Park, Y., Beltramello, M. et al. Cross-neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 by a human monoclonal SARS-CoV antibody.
                    Nature 583, 290–295 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2349-yDownload citationReceived: 06 April 2020Accepted: 12 May 2020Published: 18 May 2020Issue Date: 09 July 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2349-y
Further reading|g





                  Seroprävalenz und SARS-CoV-2-Testung in Gesundheitsberufen
                


Focke Ziemssen, Tarek Bayyoud, Karl Ulrich Bartz-Schmidt, Andreas Peter & Marius Ueffing

Der Ophthalmologe
                (2020)
              




                  Mining of epitopes on spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 from COVID-19 patients
                


Bao-zhong Zhang, Ye-fan Hu, Lin-lei Chen, Thomas Yau, Yi-gang Tong, Jing-chu Hu, Jian-piao Cai, Kwok-Hung Chan, Ying Dou, Jian Deng, Xiao-lei Wang, Ivan Fan-Ngai Hung, Kelvin Kai-Wang To, Kwok Yung Yuen & Jian-Dong Huang

Cell Research
                (2020)
              




                  Structural basis of a shared antibody response to SARS-CoV-2
                


Meng Yuan, Hejun Liu, Nicholas C. Wu, Chang-Chun D. Lee, Xueyong Zhu, Fangzhu Zhao, Deli Huang, Wenli Yu, Yuanzi Hua, Henry Tien, Thomas F. Rogers, Elise Landais, Devin Sok, Joseph G. Jardine, Dennis R. Burton & Ian A. Wilson

Science
                (2020)
              




                  The Discovery of a Putative Allosteric Site in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Using an Integrated Structural/Dynamic Approach
                


Luisa Di Paola, Hamid Hadi-Alijanvand, Xingyu Song, Guang Hu & Alessandro Giuliani

Journal of Proteome Research
                (2020)
              




                  Drug targets for COVID-19 therapeutics: Ongoing global efforts
                


Ambrish Saxena

Journal of Biosciences
                (2020)
              




Comments|By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.
Abstract|With the growth of social media as a platform to share information, veganism is becoming more visible, and could be becoming more accepted in sports and in the health and fitness industry. However, to date, there appears to be a lack of literature that discusses how to manage vegan diets for athletic purposes. This article attempted to review literature in order to provide recommendations for how to construct a vegan diet for athletes and exercisers. While little data could be found in the sports nutrition literature specifically, it was revealed elsewhere that veganism creates challenges that need to be accounted for when designing a nutritious diet. This included the sufficiency of energy and protein; the adequacy of vitamin B12, iron, zinc, calcium, iodine and vitamin D; and the lack of the long-chain n-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA in most plant-based sources. However, via the strategic management of food and appropriate supplementation, it is the contention of this article that a nutritive vegan diet can be designed to achieve the dietary needs of most athletes satisfactorily. Further, it was suggested here that creatine and β-alanine supplementation might be of particular use to vegan athletes, owing to vegetarian diets promoting lower muscle creatine and lower muscle carnosine levels in consumers. Empirical research is needed to examine the effects of vegan diets in athletic populations however, especially if this movement grows in popularity, to ensure that the health and performance of athletic vegans is optimised in accordance with developments in sports nutrition knowledge.Keywords: Vegan, Vegetarian, Plant-based, Diet
Background|Vegan diets might be becoming more visible, owing to the proliferation of social media as a means to share information, experiences and discuss opinions [1]. Promoted by some for alleged health benefits such as reduced risk of heart disease, lower LDL, blood pressure, type II diabetes and cancer [2, 3], veganism is a form of vegetarianism that prohibits the consumption of animal products [4]. Several high-profile athletes, such as former world heavyweight champion boxer David Haye and ladies tennis champion Venus Williams, have reportedly adopted vegan diets in recent times. Quite often, veganism is the product of strong ethical beliefs concerning animal welfare, and vegan activists have been subject to stigma [5], stereotyping [6] and negative attitudes [7], due in part to their vocal denigration of animal consumerism. The increased visibility of high-profile vegan competitors might suggest that veganism could be becoming more appealing for some, especially if more successful athletes adopt and publicize their vegan lifestyles.Poorly constructed vegan diets however might predispose individuals to macronutrient (protein, n-3) and micronutrient (vitamin B12 and vitamin D; iron, zinc, calcium, iodine) deficiencies [2, 3, 8, 9]. This is of particular concern if little attention is paid to accommodating for the nutrients that are excluded due to the elimination of animal products from the diet [9]. Some have alleged that a vegan diet could offer potential performance benefits due to the antioxidant (polyphenols), micronutrient (vitamin C, E) and carbohydrate-rich foods typical of plant-based diets assisting training and enhancing recovery [10, 11]. However, empirical research validating this claim is either equivocal or missing [12]. Indeed, there appears to be a lack of research into veganism in sport in general, despite interest in literature elsewhere [13]. In order to ensure that vegan diets meet both health and performance needs, basic dietary requirements have to be met and sport-specific diet-related objectives need to be achieved [9, 14]. The aim of this article is to address this point, and to provide practical recommendations for sports dieticians, coaches and trainers who might work with vegan athletes. Particular attention will be paid to the achievement of macro and micronutrient requirements for athletic and health-related purposes in this article, as well as a discussion of supplements and ergogenic aids that might be of use to performers who adopt this lifestyle choice.
Main Text|The information in this narrative has been extrapolated from a broad range of academic disciplines, such as the epidemiological and health sciences, in addition to sports nutrition literature. This is due to little information being available that discusses or investigates veganism in sport and health and fitness-related contexts. Therefore, in some instances, recommendations provided herein have yet to be fully authenticated via scientific investigation, and serve as illustrative concepts until further validation can be undertaken.EnergyFor most athletes, a well-constructed diet (omnivorous or otherwise) should provide sufficient energy in order to achieve energy balance [15]. However, data suggests that a negative energy balance is common in endurance athletes and athletes participating in weight-making and aesthetic sports (such as combat sports, gymnastics, skating and dancing, etc.) [15]. Very large athletes might also find it difficult to achieve energy balance, particularly during high-volume training phases [16, 17]. Of particular concern in sports that require low body mass, some female athletes might be at risk of developing low bone-mineral density [18]. This is likely to be exacerbated by a poorly-constructed hypocaloric diet [18]. Additionally, high intensity training can reduce appetite [19], and hectic travel schedules, poor food availability (whilst abroad or away from home) and gastrointestinal discomfort might mean that some athletes find it difficult to meet their energy requirements due to various factors [17, 20].The consequences of insufficient energy are important. Immunity might become compromised, leading to illnesses and time off from training and competition [15, 21]. Weight loss can ensue, and can lead to the loss of muscle mass, reduced strength, lower work capacity and a lack of satisfactory training adaptation [15]. Managing energy balance is thus important for all athletes, but this issue is likely to be compounded further when a habitual diet promotes early satiation and reduced appetite, such as a vegan diet [3, 4, 8–11]. Well-accepted methods of calculating energy intake include estimates such as the Cunningham or Harris-Benedict eqs. [22], Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) and/or other literature-based guidelines can all be used to determine nutrient needs and design diets [17]. The International Society of Sports Nutrition (ISSN) recommends that energy requirements should be scaled to activity level, body-mass and mode of exercise [16], to ensure that individual-specific needs are met [17]. Such recommendations are prudent in light of the preceding discussion, as well as the likelihood that athletes possess individual-specific energy and nutrient requirements which differ on the basis of sport, training and competition characteristics [15–17].Data indicates that vegans consume less energy than omnivores [8], and research suggests that vegetarian diets generally appear to be lower in protein, fat, vitamin B12, Riboflavin, vitamin D, calcium, iron and zinc when compared to an omnivorous diet [8, 14, 23, 24]. Table 1 details vegetarian diets as described in the literature, and highlights how the diets differ based on the extent of their restrictions. Some vegan diets promote the consumption of raw foods only, and data suggests that these diets might lead to poor macronutrient absorption and weight loss when consumed ad libitum [25]. Vegetarian and vegan diets can also lead to very high fibre consumption [14, 24, 25], and plant-based foods therefore tend to have low energy density and promote early satiety [26]. While these factors might be helpful for weight-loss purposes [27], these factors might lead to problems when trying to achieve a high Calorie diet. Where a high Calorie diet is needed, increasing feeding frequency [28] and increasing consumption of energy dense foods such as nuts, seeds and oils [29] might be helpful to ensure that Calorie goals are met. Monitoring and adjusting the diet on the basis of unwanted body mass fluctuations in such cases would also allow for diets to be tailored to individuals’ energy and nutrient requirements [30].
Table 1Vegetarian Diets: DefinitionsTypea
DescriptionFlexitarianb
Occasionally consumes animal flesh (meat, poultry) and fish, eggs, dairyPesco-vegetarianExcludes animal flesh but does include fishLacto-ovo vegetarianExcludes all flesh; includes diary and eggs onlyLacto vegetarianExcludes all flesh and eggs; includes dairy onlyOvo vegetarianExcludes all flesh and dairy; includes eggs onlyVeganExcludes all animal productsMacrobiotic vegetarianb
Variable dietary restrictions; includes wild meat/game and fish in some variations of the dietFruitarianIncludes fruit, nuts, seeds and a some vegetablesOpen in a separate window
aDefinitions from Phillips 2004 [14]
bReaders are advised to exercise caution in their interpretation of Flexitarian and Macrobiotic diets as vegetarian diets; owing to their selective inclusion of meat, poultry, fish and seafood, such diets might not be truly vegetarianMacronutrientsProteinThe role of protein in the athlete’s diet has garnered much attention over the years, and there has been ongoing debate about whether athletes require greater amounts of protein than non-athletic populations [31–33]. The consensus appears to be that athletes require more protein than the lay population [33, 34]. Data also indicates that protein requirements should be tailored to reflect sport-specific and training-goal requirements [35–37]. Typical recommendations therefore include 1.6–1.7 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 for strength and power athletes and 1.2–1.4 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 for endurance-sport athletes—values notably larger than the 0.8 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 recommended for most non-active adults [36, 37]. Values as high as 4.4 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 have also been investigated in the literature recently, with favourable body-composition effects noted as a results of its composition [38].The role of protein in the athlete’s diet is multifaceted. Protein serves as a substrate for exercise performance and a catalyst for exercise adaptation [32]. The balance between Muscle Protein Breakdown (MPB) and Muscle Protein Synthesis (MPS) is known as Net Protein Balance (NPB). Achieving a positive NPB via elevated MPS promotes exercise recovery, adaptation and anabolism [32, 38, 39]. During negative energy balance adaptive mechanisms preserve Fat Free Mass (FFM) under hypocaloric conditions [33, 40]. Despite this, dieting athletes and bodybuilders might still require elevated protein intakes due to the need to preserve lean mass and promote satiety [33, 39]. Concurrent resistance and endurance training might also compound the need for extra protein during a hypocaloric diet [33, 39]. Athletes involved in weight-categorised and aesthetic sports need to be cognisant of optimizing protein intakes, where the preservation of FFM and optimization of relative strength is likely to be advantageous to performance. The ISSN provides a broad protein recommendation of 1.4–2.0 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1, which is likely to be appropriate for most athletic contexts [34]. However, for athletes in need of losing body-mass, recommendations of up to 1.8–2.7 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1 have been provided in literature [33, 39], and values as high as 2.3–3.2 g ∙ kg ∙ FFM ∙ day−1 have been suggested for bodybuilders aiming to achieve competition-level leanness [39].Vegan athletes however appear to consume less protein than their omnivorous and vegetarian counterparts [11]. The optimisation of protein intakes for vegan athlete requires that attention is paid to the quantity and quality of protein consumed [41]. Plant-based protein sources are often incomplete, missing important essential amino acids, and typically contain less Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAA) than their animal-based equivalents [34, 35]. Leucine appears to be a primary trigger of MPS, and plays an important role in promoting recovery and adaptation from exercise [32, 34, 41]. Interestingly, evidence suggests that milk-based proteins might be superior to other protein sources at promoting MPS, mediated in part by the richness of its BCAA content [42, 43]. Similarly, the habitual consumption of milk as part of a diet and resistance-training programme might lead to better muscle hypertrophy when compared to a soy-protein-supplemented equivalent [44, 45]. This is might be due to milk’s superior amino acid composition [45]. Indeed, plant-based proteins often lack essential amino acids [46], and animal-based proteins therefore possess a greater biological value due to the presence of all essential amino acids in the food [46]. Common examples of the limiting amino acids in plant-based proteins include lysine, methionine, isoleucine, threonine and tryptophan. Of these, lysine appears to be to be most commonly absent, particularly from cereal grains [46]. Foods such as beans and legumes are rich sources of lysine however, and leucine can be obtained from soy beans and lentils. Other BCAAs can be found in seeds, tree nuts and chickpeas, meaning that these amino acids can be obtained by consuming a variety of protein-rich, plant-based foods [14, 46]. Indeed, the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND) have recommended that a range of plant-based proteins should be consumed by vegetarians in order to meet their protein and amino acid requirements [47]. Further, the once-popular recommendation of combining protein sources to achieve a complete essential amino acid profile in each feeding is no longer considered necessary [14]. Foods such as grains, legumes, nuts and seeds should be included in the vegan diet to ensure that all EAAs are present, and that adequate BCAA are consumed to support recovery and adaptation from training. Examples of high-protein vegan-friendly foods can be found in Table 2.
Table 2High Protein FoodsFoodProtein per 100 ga
Pumpkin seeds (dried, uncooked)30.2Lentils (red, split, uncooked)24.6Black beans (uncooked)21.6Almonds (raw)21.2Tempeh20.3Tofu (calcium set)17.3Oats (rolled)16.9Quinoa (uncooked)14.1Open in a separate window
aData from USDA food composition database SR28Plant-based protein supplements that feature in the literature and are commercially available include soy (and soy isolate), pea, rice, hemp and composite/blended protein products [45–48]. Supplemental protein might be of interest to vegan athletes, particularly if achieving sufficient protein via wholefoods is either difficult or inconvenient. Emerging data is beginning to support the efficacy of plant-based-protein powders at improving recovery from training [48] and fostering muscle hypertrophy as part of a resistance training program [45]. Recent evidence also suggests like-for-like responses when comparing supplemental plant and dairy proteins on body composition and exercise performance as part of a training programme [48], contrasting previously-reported data [45]. In comparison to dairy-based protein supplements however, plant-based supplements appear to be much less researched at this time, and further research is needed to understand the effects of individual (rice, pea, hemp, etc.) and blended products on postprandial MPS [49].Protein digestibilityThe digestibility of plant-based protein appears to be markedly less than that of animal products, which might need to be accounted for when designing a vegan diet [50]. The Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS) and Digestible Indispensable Amino Acid Score (DIAAS) are metrics that rate the quality of proteins based on their digestibility [51]. The PDCAAS has been criticised for disregarding anti-nutrient factors that affect protein absorption, and for truncating protein sources that score in excess of its 1.0 ceiling [51]. The DIAAS does neither, and is perhaps a superior system for rating protein digestibility [41, 51]. Both systems however indicate that animal-derived proteins score higher than plant-based sources [51]. Interestingly, soy protein possesses a PDCAAS of 1.0 and appears to be comparable to whey protein isolate. However, when factoring in anti-nutrient factors such as phytic acid and trypsin inhibitors, which limit the absorption of nutrients, whey protein isolate appears to be superior to soy protein when using the DIAAS (1.09 vs. 0.91) [41]. Other important plant-based protein sources such as rice, peas and hemp all score markedly lower than animal-based sources such as eggs, chicken and beef using either system [41, 51, 52]. Indeed, it has been suggested that vegetarians might need to consume more protein than meat eaters to compensate for the poorer digestibility of plant-based sources [50]. Values of up to 1.0 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1 (vs. the RDA’s 0.8 g ∙ kg−1 ∙ day−1) have been suggested for a non-athletic, vegetarian population, who might consume eggs and dairy products in addition to plant-based proteins [50]. Due to the absence of all animal proteins in the diet, it might be prudent for vegan athletes to aim for protein intakes towards the higher end of the ISSN’s protein recommendation of 1.4 to 2.0 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1, whilst in an energy-neutral or energy-positive state. In some instances, values of up to 1.8 g ∙ kg−1 to 2.7 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1 might be appropriate during weight loss phases, to compensate for the reduced digestibility and low biological value of plant-based sources [33, 39].CarbohydrateVegan diets tend to be higher in carbohydrates, fibre, fruits, vegetables, antioxidants and phytochemicals than omnivorous diets [53]. The consumption of micronutrient and phytochemical-rich foods is an important benefit of any plant-based diet [3, 9]. This might help to mitigate the effects of excess inflammation and promote recovery from training, although this has yet to be confirmed empirically [10, 12]. It has been suggested that some endurance athletes might intentionally adopt a vegan diet in order to meet their carbohydrate needs, or to assist weight management goals [10, 11, 54]. Carbohydrate requirements in sport has been the focus of literature debate for some time [55], and athletic diets generally require carbohydrate intakes of 4 to 12 g ∙ kg−1 to support high training volumes, depending on the mode of exercise, the athlete’s gender and goal of the athlete’s diet [17].Achieving an adequate carbohydrate intake via a vegan diet is relatively straightforward, and grains, legumes, beans, tubers, root vegetables and fruits can all be consumed to meet carbohydrate requirements satisfactorily. In order to achieve sufficient protein via the consumption of whole foods as recommended in this article, it is recommended that vegans consume beans, pulses, lentils and grains daily—foods that are also abundant in carbohydrate. However, recall that these foodstuffs are rich sources of fibre. Fibrous, non-digestible carbohydrates and lignin provide volume and bulk, are resistant to digestion and absorption, and promote early satiation and enhance prolonged satiety signalling [47, 56, 57]. For athletes requiring higher energy intakes, the consumption of fibre-rich foods to achieve protein and carbohydrate adequacy might prove to be difficult for some. Due to the lectins in foods such as beans, grains, nuts and potatoes [58], as well as the fermentation of resistant starch and indigestible carbohydrates (found in oats, peas, beans, fruits, and in certain vegetables and lentils), a high-fibre diet can also promote gastric distress in some cases [38, 59, 60]. In order to achieve sufficient carbohydrate for the athletes involved in high-volume training phases it might be appropriate (in some contexts) to choose some lower-fibre foods when developing high-carbohydrate meals, as long as sufficient micronutrient status (particularly B vitamins) can be ensured. Foods such as rice, pasta, noodles and buckwheat contain less fibre than oats, lentils, beans and wholegrain breads, and removing the skin from tubers and root vegetables reduces the fibre contents of these foods whilst maintaining decent carbohydrate levels.Carbohydrate timing and supplementationThe optimisation of carbohydrate consumption with respect to training and competition has been debated in the literature [61]. Conventional wisdom suggests that maintaining high muscle glycogen stores (achieved via a carbohydrate-rich diet), consuming carbohydrates before and during exercise (scaled to absolute intensity and mode of exercise), consuming multiple-transportable carbohydrates (such as a glucose-fructose mixture), and carbohydrate mouth rinsing (to delay fatigue) might enhance performance during middle-distance and endurance events [37, 62]. The effects of carbohydrate consumption before and during short-duration high-intensity sports are equivocal [36], however carbohydrate feedings 0–60 min prior to exercise have been indicated for events lasting >30 mins [37, 62]. Carbohydrate doses during activity can be scaled based on the event, where more/less carbohydrate is consumed with respect to the time and intensity of sport/exercise performance [37, 62]. In most cases, carbohydrate supplements appear to be vegan-friendly, and so their consumption is feasible for most vegan athletes. Consuming calcium-fortified fruit juices as a liquid carbohydrate might serve dual purposes however, and enable vegans to meet both carbohydrate and calcium needs whilst concomitantly offering possible ergogenic advantages if used as indicated in the literature [61].FatVegan diets are typically lower in total and saturated fat and higher in n-6 fats than omnivorous and vegetarian diets [8, 13, 63]. This trend appears to be associated with reductions in heart disease, hypertension, type II diabetes, cholesterol and cancer [63], and is a purported health benefit of veganism. However, the role of fat in the diet is an area of much discussion, and deleterious effects of fat consumption are not universally accepted [64–66]. Indeed, in some cases, high-fat diets have even been promoted [55]. Interestingly, research has indicated that low-fat dieting might negatively influence testosterone levels in males [67]. This might be of interest to athletes needing to maximise anabolism and adaptation to resistance training. However, despite reporting lower total and saturated fat intakes, evidence has also suggested that vegan males do not have statistically lower androgen levels than omnivores [68]. Relationships between fat consumption, hormones and sport performance might require additional investigation. In many instances, it appears that the health implications of a dietary fat might reflect its fatty acid composition [64, 69], meaning that attention should be paid to the quantity and quality of fat consumed. Achieving recommended values of 0.5–1.5 g ∙ kg ∙ day−1 (or 30% of daily caloric intake) is feasible for vegan athletes given adequate consumption of oils, avocados, nuts and seeds.ALA, EPA and DHADue to an absence of marine-sourced fats, vegans appear to consume fewer n-3 fatty acids and possess lower serum n-3 fatty acid levels than omnivores and other vegetarians [8, 13, 63, 70]. This might have important health and performance implications. The n-3 fatty acids are important for normal growth and development, and appear to play an important role in cardiovascular health [71], in inflammatory and chronic disease [72], and might improve exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) and immunity [73]. Of interest to athletes, n-3 fats might also increase nitric oxide production [71, 74], and improve heart-rate variability [75]. Both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids are parent fatty acids for eicosanoids (prostaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes), and n-3 fatty acids appear to possess anti-inflammatory, antithrombotic, antiarrhythmic; hypolipidemic, vasodilatory and antiproliferative properties [71, 72]. Both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids are essential, however the long chain n-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) are considered to be under-consumed in the modern western diet in general [72], and in vegans in particular [47, 70].There is ongoing debate about the quantity and/or ratio of n-3 to n-6 needed to manipulate the synthesis of pro and anti-inflammatory eicosanoids in order to impact health and performance favourably [76–78]. In the UK, an upper limit of 10% of energy from pro-inflammatory n-6 fatty acids has been recommended by the Department of Health to reduce negative effects of overconsumption [78]. Elsewhere, Sanders [79] and Philips [14] recommend that vegetarian diets limit linoleic acid consumption (an n-6 fatty acid), found in sunflower, corn and safflower oils, for similar purposes. The n-3 α-linolenic acid (ALA) is an important constituent of cellular membrane and is converted to EPA at ~8% efficiency in humans, which appears to be both age and gender-specific in magnitude [80]. Roughly 0.5% of ALA is converted to DHA, highlighting humans’ poor ability to enzymatically convert ALA to this fatty acid [81]. While humans do convert a small amount of ALA to DHA, the primary source of this in the diet is cold water fish and seafood. EPA and DHA exert many of the reported health and performance benefits of n-3 fatty acid consumption and is now a popular supplement [80]. Supplemental ALA has been shown to increase blood EPA levels [82] but does not appear to affect DHA status [83]. Microalgae oil is rich in DHA (and EPA) and might be a useful supplement for vegans and vegetarians. Microalgae-oil supplements have been shown to raise both blood EPA and DHA levels [84]. However, recommendations for vegan-friendly DHA supplements do not appear in the literature at this time [9]. Recommendations do appear for other food sources of the n-3 ALA, such as flax seeds, walnuts, and chia seeds [9, 14]. Interestingly, flax/linseeds are also rich in lignan precursors, which might offer broader health-related benefits [85], and chia is also a complete protein [86]. Combining whole-food sources of ALA as indicated in this article with supplemental DHA derived from microalgae oil might optimise a vegan’s n-3 fatty acid intake, and improve health concurrently with any health and performance-enhancing effect that augmented n-3 diets might offer athletes [76, 77]. Research detailing how to optimise n-3 consumption for vegans is missing at the time of writing; however, recommendations of 1–2 g ∙ day−1 of combined EPA and DHA at a ratio of 2:1 have been suggested for athletes elsewhere [77]. To achieve a DHA dose of 500 - 1000 mg ∙ day−1, this would equate to 1–2 g of microalgae oil, or 2–4 capsules in most commercial products.MicronutrientsAchieving micronutrient sufficiency is an important concern for all athletes. The AND have indicated that attention should be paid to achieving adequacy in vitamin B12, iron, zinc, calcium, iodine and vitamin D intakes when designing a vegan diet in particular [47]. Poorly designed diets might predispose individuals to deficiency regardless of predilection, which could have detrimental health and performance implications [2, 9, 12]. This needs to be understood by those seeking to adopt veganism, and strategies to mitigate the risks of under-consuming these nutrients need to be present if a vegan diet is to optimize health and performance. Table 3 compares the nutritional implications of several diets (omnivorous, pesco-vegetarian, vegetarian and vegan), and provides recommendations for athletes and practitioners. The following section will identify and elaborate upon concerns highlighted in the literature, based upon research indicating what micronutrients might be under-consumed in a vegan diet [2–4, 8, 14, 47, 63, 70, 87].
Table 3Diet ComparisonDiet typePossible dietary Issuesa
Possible sport-related issuesa
Recommendationsb
OmnivorousPoor ad libitum diets can lead to nutrient deficiency.Vitamin D deficiency possible (if sun exposure is poor / unlikely).Male and female athletes with low energy intake at risk of nutrient deficiencies.Calcium requirements increased during negative energy balance, amenorrhea and female athlete triad.Energy intake should be scaled to activity level.Depending on sport, 1.4–2.0 g ∙ kg−1 protein; 3–10 g ∙ kg−1 CHO; 0.5–1.5 g ∙ kg−1 fat (or, 30% energy) consumed daily.Micronutrient-rich diet sufficient to achieve DRVs; Vitamin D3 supplement might be necessary.Pesco-vegetarianSame as omnivores plus:Energyc, protein.Iron deficiency with and without anaemia a risk in female athletes.Same as omnivores, plus ensure that iron needs are met via a variety of food sources.Lacto-ovo vegetarian & Lacto-vegetarianSame as pesco-vegetarians plus:Long chain n-3 (EPA, DHA), iron, zinc, riboflavin deficiencies more likely.Same as pesco-vegetarians plus:Reduced muscle creatine and carnosine stores a possibility in males and females.Same as pesco-vegetarians plus:EPA / DHA supplement (total 1–2 g ∙ day−1; 2:1 ratio) might be needed.Increase iron (m = 14 mg & f = 33 mg ∙ day1) and zinc (16.5 mg & 12 mg ∙ day1) intakes due to reduced bioavailability of plant sources.VeganSame as vegetarians plus:Protein, fat, n-3, B12, calcium, iodine deficiencies also possible / likely in males and females.Same as vegetarians plus:Low bone-mineral density is an increased possibility in female athletes.Achieving energy balance might be a problem for larger athletes.Same as vegetarians plus:Increase protein to 1.7–2.0 g ∙ kg−1 and up to 1.8–2.7 g ∙ kg−1 during weight loss phases (obtain from range of plant-based foods).Nuts, seeds, avocados, oils to achieve 0.5–1.5 g ∙ kg−1 fat daily.EPA / DHA (microalgae); vitamin D3 (lichen) & B12 supplements might be needed; iodine in some instances too.1000 mg ∙ day−1 calcium from beans, pulses, fortified foods and vegetables.Open in a separate window
aData from various sources [8–11, 13, 14, 23–25, 47, 63, 70, 87]
bRecommendations from various sources [9–11, 16, 17, 22, 47]
cEnergy balance a potential issue in endurance, weight-making and aesthetic sports and larger athletes regardless of diet [15]Vitamin B12Due to an absence of animal and dairy products, vegans are at an increased risk of developing Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) deficiency [87]. Cobalamin is synthesised from anaerobic microorganisms, in the rumen of cattle and sheep, and humans typically consume pre-formed cobalamin from animal products, which are the main source of B12 in the diet [88]. Plant-based sources of cobalamin are unusual, unless the plant has been contaminated by manure or from animal waste [47, 88]. Cobalamin is essential for normal nervous system function, homocysteine metabolism and DNA synthesis [88]. Insufficient cobalamin can lead to morphological changes to the blood cells and the development of haematological and neurological symptoms, such as megaloblastic anaemia and neuropathy [89]. Long-term cobalamin deficiency can lead to irreversible neurological damage, and data indicates that veganism can lead to deficiency if cobalamin is not supplemented [14]. Data from the EPIC-Oxford cohort study in the UK indicated that ~50% of vegan participants were vitamin B12 deficient [90]. An additional 21% of the vegans were also classified as having very low levels. Interestingly, despite 20% of participants consuming a B12 supplement, blood-vitamin levels between those that did vs. those that did not take supplements were no different, suggesting that the supplementation practices of the cohort were inadequate to achieve B12 sufficiency. Sources of vitamin B12 suitable for a vegan diet include B12-fortified breakfast cereals and nutritional yeast, as well as dietary supplements. Supplemental vitamin B12 products typically contain cyanocobalamin, although other forms such as methylcobalamin and hydroxocobalamin are available—the latter by prescription only. The body appears to have a limited capacity to absorb vitamin B12 supplements orally [88, 89], which is limited by the presence of intrinsic factor, a glycoprotein secreted by the stomach’s parietal cells that combines with B12 prior to absorption in the distal ileum via receptor-mediated endocytosis [89]. For an ingested 500 μg oral supplement, only an approximated 10 μg might be absorbed [89]. Because of this poor bioavailability, sublingual drops, lozenges and transdermal products have been developed and marketed under the pretence that they offer better absorption, however research supporting these claims could not be found when writing this article. The requirement for vegans to supplement with vitamin B12 is important, and vegans are advised to consume fortified foods and/or take a daily supplement to ensure an adequate intake of the vitamin [9, 14]. The Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) for vitamin B12 is 2.4 μg ∙ day−1 for adults of both sexes [91], and vegans have been advised to consume up to 6 μg ∙ day− 1 of supplemental B12 by some authors [10]. Where adequate B12 status cannot be achieved via oral supplementation and fortified food products alone, vegans might need to have serum levels monitored by a medical practitioner if deficiency is suspected [87]; subcutaneous or intramuscular injections might even be indicated in some contexts [87]; monitoring B12 status carefully might be necessary for some vegan athletes.IronThe iron status of vegetarians and vegans has received attention in the literature [92–94], and it appears that owing to a diet rich in whole-grains and legumes, both vegetarians and vegans consume similar amounts of iron as omnivores [9, 63]. However, issues with the bioavailability of plant-based iron might mean that vegans need to pay attention to ensuring that sufficiency is prioritized [92, 93]. The main source of iron in the vegan diet is found in the non-haem form, which is less bioavailable than the haem iron found in animal products [93]. Vegan diets also commonly contain dietary inhibitors such as the polyphenols tannin (found in coffee, tea, and cocoa) and phytates (found in whole grains and legumes), which reduce the amount of iron absorbed from the diet. Research into the iron status of vegans has found that female vegans appear to have lower iron stores than omnivores, and are more prone to iron-deficiency anaemia [63, 94, 95]. Male vegans appear to have a similar iron status as non-vegans and are less impacted by iron status [63]. Iron-deficiency anaemia is caused by insufficient consumption of iron (or insufficient absorption of iron) and is a decrease in red blood cells (RBCs) or haemoglobin, leading to symptoms such as tiredness and fatigue; weakness, shortness of breath and reduced exercise tolerance [95]. Iron deficiency without anaemia has also been shown to reduce endurance capacity, increase energy expenditure and impair adaptation to endurance exercise in females experiencing tissue depletion [96]. Supplementation has been shown to correct such problems and might be warranted if adequacy cannot be achieved via the diet (97). Indeed, achieving an iron-sufficient diet appears to be rudimentary for all female athletes [95–97].Interestingly, however, it has been suggested that the body can regulate iron absorption based upon blood concentrations of the mineral [14]. Low iron status can lead to intestinal adaptations that increase absorption and reduce secretion in order to maintain equilibrium [14]—an effect that appears to be present with other important micronutrients discussed in this article [3, 97]. It appears that humans can adapt to a wide range of iron statuses and intakes, and vegetarians and vegans generally do not appear to suffer adverse health effects because of reduced iron absorption [98]. Hunt [93], however, recommends that iron intakes for vegetarians be increased by 80%, so that adult males and females achieve a recommended intake of 14 mg ∙ day−1 and 33 mg ∙ day−1 (vs. the Recommended Daily Allowance’s 8 mg ∙ day−1 and 18 mg ∙ day−1), due to the aforementioned bioavailability issues. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) concur, and suggest that iron requirements for vegetarians are 1.8 times greater than omnivores [92]. Elevated intakes of iron for vegetarians and vegans have been refuted however on the basis that high iron intakes might increase susceptibility to heart disease and cancer [99], and that supplemental iron might affect the bioavailability of other minerals and copper [14]. Indeed, it has also been suggested that such recommendations have exaggerated requirements by basing recommendations off of acute feeding studies, where the effects of iron inhibitors and enhancers might have been artificially pronounced [3, 92, 100]. Non-haem iron absorption can be enhanced (as well as inhibited), and consuming non-haem iron-rich foods in conjunction with vitamin C appears to increase absorption [9, 92]. Vegan athletes should therefore look to achieve iron sufficiency by choosing wholefood iron sources, reducing their consumption of inhibitor-containing foodstuffs such as tea, coffee and cocoa (when eating iron-rich meals), consume vitamin C containing foods concurrently to enhance absorption, and incorporate soaked, sprouted and/or fermented foods in their diets, if palatable. In cases of where individuals might be prone to iron deficiency, i.e. females with large menstrual blood losses, monitoring iron status and considering supplementation might be necessary. A list of food sources for iron and other nutrients discussed in this article can be found in Table 4.
Table 4Vegan-Friendly Food SourcesNutrientVegan-friendly sourcesProteinPulses, grains, legumes, tofu, quinoa, nuts, seeds, vegetablesALAFlax seeds, walnuts, chia seeds, hemp seedsEPAa
Seaweed, algaeDHAMicroalgae oil, seaweedVitamin B12Supplements, fortified foods, plant milks, nutritional yeast (fortified), fermented soyb, mushroomsb
IronLegumes, grains, nuts, seeds, fortified foods, green vegetablesZincBeans, nuts, seeds, oats, wheat germ, nutritional yeastCalciumTofu (calcium set), fortified plant milks and juice, kale, broccoli, sprouts, cauliflower, bok choiIodineSeaweed, cranberries, potatoes, prunes, navy beans, iodized saltVitamin DLichen-derived D3 supplementsOpen in a separate window
aEPA can also be enzymatically converted from ALA and retroconverted from DHA [83, 84]
bMight not be a reliable source of this nutrientZincZinc is a constituent of enzymes involved in metabolic processes that relate to DNA stabilisation and gene expression, and is important in cell growth, repair and protein metabolism [92]. Similar to iron, zinc is widely available in plant-based foods but is also not readily absorbed [93]. Similarly as well, the body appears to adapt to lower intakes of zinc by reducing losses and increasing absorption in order to maintain equilibrium [3, 97]. It has been suggested therefore that vegetarians do not need to pay special attention to consuming this mineral [3]. However, the IOM have suggested that vegetarians might need to consume up to 50% more zinc than non-vegetarians owing to its poor bioavailability [92]. Indeed, common vegan sources of zinc include beans, whole grains, nuts and seeds (Table ​(Table4)—foods4)—foods that also contain phytate [93]. However, processing foods can reduce phytate too. Leavening bread activates phytase, breaking down phytic acid, and soaking, fermenting and sprouting nuts and grains can all reduce phytate levels and increase nutrient bioavailability [101]. Based on the IOM’s suggestion, it has been recommended that male vegans consume up to 16.5 mg ∙ day−1 of zinc (vs. the RDA of 11 mg ∙ day−1) and females up to 12 mg ∙ day−1 (vs. 8 mg ∙ day−1) [10]. Zinc bioavailability appears to be enhanced by dietary protein and inhibited by supplemental folic acid, iron, calcium, copper and magnesium, but might not be affected by the whole-food sources of these nutrients [101]. In order to achieve the above recommendations, vegans should look to consume zinc-rich foods such as hemp and pumpkin seeds, and other grains, nuts and beans (Table ​(Table4),4), and look to adopt processing methods that improve mineral absorption, such as soaking and fermenting, as suggested earlier. If this is not achievable, a supplement should be considered. Owing to issues concerning bioavailability, zinc supplements should not be consumed at the same time as supplemental forms of the aforementioned minerals. Multivitamin/mineral formulas might be inadequate if to ensure nutrient adequacy in this instance.CalciumCalcium is abundant in a wide range of foodstuffs, most notably dairy products. Data indicates that vegans consume less calcium than omnivores and other vegetarians [63]. Indeed, Canadian vegans have been shown to consume only 578 mg ∙ day−1 compared with the 950 mg ∙ day−1 and 875 mg ∙ day−1 of omnivores and ovo-lacto vegetarians [102]. Vegans have been shown to be at a higher risk of fracture due to lower calcium intakes [103]. Low intakes of calcium are particularly problematic for children and teenagers, where higher calcium requirements are required for bone development [78, 104]. As with other minerals, the body appears to be able to regulate calcium status during periods of low consumption. When habitual calcium intakes are low, and when sufficient vitamin D is present, an increased proportion of calcium is absorbed from food [104]. It has been suggested that lower protein intakes typical of a vegan diet might contribute to greater calcium retention due to high-protein diets promoting calcium excretion in the urine [104, 105]. However, evidence demonstrates that protein-rich diets have no effect on calcium retention [105], and in some instances work synergistically with calcium to improve calcium retention and bone metabolism [34, 105]. It is widely recommended that adequate calcium is necessary for blood clotting, nerve transmission, muscle stimulation, vitamin D metabolism and maintaining bone structure [106]. Indeed, the importance of calcium for the vegan athlete reflects its role in the maintenance of skeletal health during weight-bearing exercise, and increased calcium losses experienced during heavy perspiration [107]. Calcium requirements might also be exacerbated during phases of calorie restriction, amenorrhea and in some instances of the female athlete triad [107]. However, it is also proposed that the RDA for calcium (1000 mg ∙ day−1) is sufficient to meet the requirements of athletic populations in most contexts, and so despite the aforesaid factors, it has been suggested that athletes do not have an elevated requirement for the nutrient in general [107].In order to meet the above requirement, vegan athletes should consume plant-based sources of calcium such as beans, pulses and green vegetables in sufficient quantities to achieve the 1000 mg ∙ day−1 recommendation [106]. Broccoli, bok choy and kale are particularly high in calcium; green vegetables such as spinach and arugula contain oxalate however, which impedes calcium absorption [104]. Vegans therefore should choose plant sources that contain low oxalate levels when designing calcium-rich meals. Calcium-fortified foods are also widely available, and examples such as calcium-fortified soy, nut milks and fruit juices are all vegan-friendly and provide readily absorbable forms of the nutrient (Table ​(Table4).4). Vegans can also consume calcium-set tofu, which is also rich in protein, to help achieve their requirements if palatable. If a vegan diet cannot achieve sufficient calcium levels, then a supplement might also be required [14].IodineIodine is an essential trace element needed for physical and mental growth and development, and plays in an important role in thyroid function and metabolism [92]. Excessively high or low intakes of iodine can lead to thyroid dysfunction, and vegans have been shown to consume both excessively high and low intakes depending on their dietary choices [108, 109]. To highlight, a study by Krajcovicova-Kudlackova and colleagues [110] found that 80% of Slovakian vegans were iodine deficient. Lightowler and Davies [109] however found that some vegans consumed excess iodine (from seaweed) in their study. Common iodine sources include fish and dairy products, and the DRI for Iodine has been set at 150 μg ∙ day−1 for adults [92]. Iodine content in foods vary according to the soil-iodine content (when growing produce), the farming methods used during production, the season it is grown in, and the species of fish (if non vegan) [111]. Goitrogens, found in cruciferous vegetables such as cabbage, cauliflower and rutabaga decrease iodine utilisation and might affect adversely thyroid function if consumed in large amounts [111]. However, cooking such foods appears to destroy many of the goitrogenic compounds present, making this effect unlikely. Raw-food vegans should look to limit the consumption of raw, goitrogenic foods where possible.Seaweed and sea vegetables are a concentrated source of iodine that are vegan-friendly. Excessively high iodine intakes have been reported in vegans who regularly consume seaweed however [109, 112], and in some cases have led to elevated Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) levels [113, 114]. Elevated TSH might reflect iodine-induced hyperthyroidism or iodine-induced hypothyroidism [114]. However, iodine intakes above 150 μg ∙ day−1 appear to be well tolerated, unless clinical susceptibilities to thyroid issues are present [115]. Iodine concentrations in seaweed can vary markedly [115], and the British Dietetic Association suggests that seaweed might not be a reliable iodine source [116]. Iodized table salt has however been indicated for vegans looking to achieve sufficient intakes [14], and iodine can be also found in foods such as potatoes, breads (in some countries) and cranberries (Table ​(Table4).4). Examples of how to achieve sufficient iodine levels (and for other nutrients discussed in this article) can be seen in Tables 5 and ​and6,6, which provide menus based on a 2500 and 3500 Calorie requirement. Where iodine sufficiency cannot be achieved through food alone, a supplement that meets the 150 μg ∙ day−1 recommendation might be advisable.

Table 5Sample 2500 Calorie menua
MealIngredientsBreakfast:
“Nutty Banana Oatmeal”
• Oats, ½ cup (uncooked)• Almond milk, fortified, unsweetened, 1 cup• Banana, 1 small (60 g)• Brazil nuts, 1nut• Flax seeds, milled, 1 tablespoon• Pumpkin seeds, 1 tablespoon• 1000 IU Vitamin D3 (lichen derived)• 2.4 μg Vitamin B12• 2 g microalgae oil supplementLunch / Pre-training:
“Asian-style Kale Salad”
• Kale, 1 cup, chopped• Carrot, 1 medium, shredded• Cucumber, ½ cup, shredded• Dried wakame, 1 g, sprinkles• Rice noodles, 57 g (uncooked weight)• Edamame beans, ½ cup• Tofu, calcium-set, ½ cup• Ginger, garlic, chili, to taste• Sesame oil, 1 tablespoonPost Training:
“Mixed berry protein smoothie”
• Pea protein isolate, 40 g• Frozen raspberries, ½ cup• Frozen strawberries, ½ cup• Frozen blueberries, ½ cup• Hemp milk, fortified, 1 cupDinner:
“Garbanzo and Sweet potato Curry”
• Garbanzos, 120 g, cooked• Seitan, 40 g• Sweet potatoes, 1 medium• Tomatoes, ½ can• Onion, 1 red, small• Garlic, 1 clove• Olive oil, 1 tbsp.• Long grain rice, 1 cup• Curry spices, to tasteTotal Energy2512 CaloriesProtein154 gCarbohydrate312 gTotal Fat75 g
n-34.4 gALA1597 mgEPA300 mgDHA529 mgFibre (g)58 gVitamin B123.4 μgIron31.4 mgZinc15.4 mgCalcium2226 mgIodine173 μgVitamin D34.5 μgOpen in a separate window
aBased on a 77 kg male gym goer; diet created using Nutritics (Nutritics Limited, Dublin, Ireland)Table 6Sample 3500 Calorie menua
MealIngredientsBreakfast:
“Tofu scramble with avocado toast”
• Tofu, ½ block / 250 g• Whole-wheat bread, toasted, 3 large slices• Avocado, ¼, diced• Navel orange, 1 medium• 2 g microalgae oil supplementLunch / pre training:
“Roast vegetable, tempeh & buckwheat salad”
• Buckwheat, raw, 1 cup• Tempeh, ¾ cup / 100 g• Zucchini, ½, roasted• Eggplant, ½, roasted• Onion, red, ½, roasted• Bell pepper, ½, roasted• Olive oil, balsamic vinegar, 1 tbsp. EachPost-training snack:
“Spiced apple cereal”
• Puffed rice, 2 cups• Apple, 1 large• Prunes, chopped, 18 g• Cinnamon, to taste• Soy milk, unsweetened, 270 ml• Rice protein, vanilla, 1.5 scoops / 35 gDinner:“Spaghetti”
• Black bean spaghetti, 75 g, raw weight• Spaghetti, dried, 88 g, raw weight• Pasta sauce, tomato, low sodium, ½ jar• Onion, red, ½• Spinach, frozen, 70 g• Garlic, basil, to taste• Olive oil, 1 tbsp.• Nutritional yeast flakes (B12 enriched), 1 tbsp.Snack:
“Chia, flax and hemp seed dessert”
• Chia seeds, flax seeds, hemp seeds, 2 tbsp. Each• Almond milk, 1 cup• Dates, chopped, × 2• Strawberries, ½ cupTotal Energy3446 CaloriesProtein193 gCarbohydrate443 gTotal Fat94 g 
n-39.8 g ALA7754 mg EPA300 mg DHA529 mgFibre (g)91 gVitamin B124.2 μgIron42 mgZinc40 mgCalcium2406 mgIodine153 μgVitamin D22.7 μgOpen in a separate window
aBased on a 94 kg male strength athlete; diet created using Nutritics (Nutritics Limited, Dublin, Ireland)Vitamin DVitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin produced in the skin, is essential for calcium absorption and bone health, and plays an important role in many physiological processes [117]. While humans synthesize vitamin D from exposure to sunlight, vitamin D can also be found in animal products and fortified foods [117]. Dietary intakes of vitamin D appear to be low in vegans who do not achieve sufficient sun exposure [118]. Cholecalciferol (D3) is an animal-derived version of vitamin D that is now widely available as a supplement [119]. Ergocalciferol [D2] is a vegan-friendly version of vitamin D but appears to be less bioavailable than cholecalciferol [119, 120]. Recently, however, vegan-friendly versions of cholecalciferol derived from lichen, a composite fungal-algae organism, have become commercially available, offering vegans a more bioavailable supplemental option. These supplements appear to be dosed similarly to animal-derived products, with dosages of 200–1000 IU per serving being common, and can be used as a like-for-like equivalent for animal-based counterparts.In the USA, the IOM recommend an RDA of 600 I.U ∙ day−1 [117] for vitamin D. In the UK the Department of Health recommend 10 μg ∙ day−1 (400 I.U) is supplemented by individuals who do not achieve adequate sun exposure [121]. Of interest to athletes, Cannell et al. [122] suggest that optimising vitamin D status might improve athletic performance, if deficiency is present. Indeed, Moran et al. [123] highlight that poor vitamin D status negatively affects muscle strength and oxygen consumption, and suggest that supplementation might protect against overuse injury via its role in calcium metabolism and skeletal muscle function. Optimising vitamin D status is perhaps an important consideration for all athletes, regardless of dietary choice [124].Effective vitamin D dosing might necessitate that supplementation is optimized via bespoke treatment strategies [125], based on individuals’ existing blood levels. In order to determine vitamin D status, plasma 25OHD levels can be sampled. Values <20 ng ∙ ml−1 are considered to be clinically deficient [126]. Optimal values might fall between 40 and 70 ng ∙ ml−1 [126, 127]. Recommendations for supplementation provided by Dalqhuist and colleagues [128] suggest that athletes should aim to achieve plasma 25OHD levels in the range of 30–40 ng ∙ ml−1. Dalqhuist and team [128] also suggest that supplemental doses of up to 4–5000 IU ∙ day−1 coupled with 50–100 μg ∙ day−1 of vitamin K1 and K2 could improve exercise recovery, allowing athletes to train more frequently. Data concerning performance-enhancing effects and toxicity at higher dosages of vitamin D have yet to be demonstrated, however a tolerable upper intake of 4000 IU ∙ day−1 has been established by the IOM [106]. Blood 25OHD values >150 ng ∙ ml−1 (plus hypercalcemia) are generally thought to signify toxicity [126]. Further research is warranted to determine optimal vitamin D doses for athletes.Supplements and ergogenic aidsCreatineResearch indicates that vegetarian and vegan diets reduce muscle creatine stores [129–131]. Creatine is a nitrogeneous, organic acid synthesized endogenously from arginine, glycine and methionine [132]. Foods such as meat, fish and poultry are rich sources of creatine but are excluded from a vegan diet. Creatine’s performance-enhancing effects have been well studied, and it appears that supplementation can improve short-term high-intensity exercise performance, muscle hypertrophy and maximal strength [132, 133]. Creatine supplementation might also lead to increased plasma volume, improved glycogen storage, improved ventilatory threshold, and reduce oxygen consumption during submaximal exercise [133]. Interestingly, data indicates that creatine supplementation might be most beneficial for athletes with low pre-existing muscle creatine stores. To highlight, Burke et al. [129] found that supplemental creatine attenuated low muscle creatine stores in vegetarians, who experienced greater improvements in FFM, maximal strength and type II muscle fibre area compared to omnivores. Creatine supplementation might therefore be an important ergogenic aid for vegan athletes to consider, and compensate for reduced muscle creatine stores experienced as a result of their lifestyle choices.Dosing creatine effectively requires the achievement of muscle creatine saturation, and regimens of 20 g ∙ day−1 for 3–7 days to load creatine followed by maintenance doses of 3–5 g ∙ day−1 are common [132]. However, a smaller dose of 3–5 g ∙ day−1 taken over a 4-week period will achieve creatine saturation over the long term similarly [134]. Other protocols, such as 1 g ∙ 30 min−1 over 20 intakes per day, have also been suggested as means to achieve maximal saturation [135]. The co-ingestion of creatine with protein and carbohydrate might increase creatine retention by way of insulin-mediated storage, but appears not to have any noticeable performance-enhancing effects beyond stand-alone ingestion [133]. For vegan athletes who decide to supplement, powder forms of synthetic creatine are vegan-friendly (capsulated products might contain bovine gelatine), and the co-ingestion of creatine with whole food and/or a protein and carbohydrate mixture might be an optimal way of achieving creatine storage.Beta alanineSimilar to muscle creatine levels, evidence also indicates that vegetarians have lower levels of muscle carnosine compared to omnivores [136, 137]. Carnosine, an intracellular proton buffer and antioxidant, is a cytoplasmic dipeptide (β-alanyl-l-histidine) found in skeletal muscle and the central nervous system, and is synthesised in situ from its rate-limiting precursor β-alanine [136]. Meat and poultry are the main sources of β-alanine in the diet, and β-alanine supplementation has been shown to increase muscle carnosine concentrations, leading to improvements in high-intensity exercise performance by way of buffering excess protons, scavenging free radicals, chelating transition metals and reducing fatigue [138, 139]. Achieving muscle carnosine saturation appears to be an important factor in effective β-alanine dosing, and research validates the efficacy of loading β-alanine in divided doses of 4–6 g ∙ day−1 for 2–4 weeks [139]. The efficacy of β-alanine supplementation has been confirmed in exercise >60 s duration, in aerobic exercise, and in attenuating muscle fatigue and improving time-trial performance in high-intensity exercise [139]. The effect of supplementation in exercise lasting <60 s is unclear however. Owing to muscle carnosine levels being lower in vegetarians than omnivores [137], it is feasible that the efficacy of β-alanine supplementation might also be augmented in vegans. Further research is necessary to validate this hypothesis however.Taurine and β-alanine share transport mechanisms, meaning that supplemental β-alanine might theoretically inhibit taurine uptake in skeletal muscle [139, 140]. Taurine is a sulphur-containing amino acid that appears to play a role in many important physiological processes in humans, including bile acid conjugation, cardiovascular function, neurotransmission and euglycemia, and is obtained from seafood, meat and dairy products [140, 141]. Vegans have been shown to consume negligible amounts of taurine [142], which is conditionally essential in some clinical contexts [141]. It has been suggested that vegans might benefit from taurine supplements owing to its absence in the vegan diet [10]. However, further support for this recommendation could not be found in the literature located for this article. If indeed supplemental β-alanine does lead to reductions in taurine in humans, then vegans might be at greater risk of experiencing taurine depletion due to its absence from the diet. However, it must be noted that β-alanine has not been shown to reduce taurine levels in humans to date, and is considered to be safe when used within the parameters of recommended dosing [139].The primary limitation of this review is the lack of research into veganism in sport. To mitigate this issue, information was gathered for this review from multiple sources, and inferences were made from the available data and via reasoned judgements. As such, many of the recommendations in this article require authentication, and so this article should serve as a catalyst for future research as well as a guidance document for athletes and practitioners. The main strength of this review is its comprehensiveness.
Conclusions|In general, vegan diets tend to be lower in Calories, protein, fat, vitamin B12, n-3 fats, calcium and iodine than omnivorous diets, whilst concurrently being higher in carbohydrates, fibre, micronutrients, phytochemicals and antioxidants. Achieving a high energy intake is difficult in some instances, owing to plant-based foods promoting satiety. Issues with the digestibility and absorption of nutrients such as protein, calcium, iron and zinc might be an issue too, meaning that athletes might need to consume higher amounts of these foods compared to omnivores and other vegetarians. However, through the strategic selection and management of food choices, and with special attention being paid to the achievement of energy, macro and micronutrient recommendations, along with appropriate supplementation, a vegan diet can achieve the needs of most athletes satisfactorily. Supplementation with creatine and β-alanine might offer augmented performance-enhancing effects in vegans, who experience low pre-existing levels of these substances, and further research is needed to investigate the performance-enhancing effects of these substances in vegan populations. For some, a vegan diet is the manifestation of important ethical beliefs, and requires diligence to sustain [5–7]. It is a central tenet of this article that similar conscientiousness needs be paid to achieving dietary sufficiency, otherwise health and performance could suffer over the long term if an individual’s nutrition is not managed appropriately.
Acknowledgements|Not Applicable.FundingThis article was not funded.Availability of data and materialsNot applicable.Author’s contributionsDR is the sole author for this manuscript, and conceptualised, wrote and edited the article.
Abbreviations|25OHD25-hydroxyvitamin DALAα-linolenic acidANDAcademy of Nutrition and DieteticsBCAABranched Chain Amino AcidDHADocosahexaenoic acidDIAASDigestible Indispensible Amino Acid ScoreDRIDietary Reference IntakeEPAEicosapentaenoic acidFFMFat Free MassIOMInstitute of MedicineISSNInternational Society of Sports NutritionPDCAASProtein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid ScoreRDARecommended Daily AllowanceTSHThyroid-Stimulating Hormone
Notes|Author’s informationDR is a senior lecturer at Sheffield Hallam University, UK, possesses a Doctorate of Professional studies and is a registered Nutritionist with the Association for Nutrition.Ethics approval and consent to participateNot applicable.Consent for publicationNot applicable.Competing interestsThe author declares that he has no competing interests.Publisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Alternative hosts and model animals|The severe acute respiratory syndrome–coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic may have originated in bats, but how it made its way into humans is unknown. Because of its zoonotic origins, SARS-CoV-2 is unlikely to exclusively infect humans, so it would be valuable to have an animal model for drug and vaccine development. Shi et al. tested ferrets, as well as livestock and companion animals of humans, for their susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 (see the Perspective by Lakdawala and Menachery). The authors found that SARS-CoV-2 infects the upper respiratory tracts of ferrets but is poorly transmissible between individuals. In cats, the virus replicated in the nose and throat and caused inflammatory pathology deeper in the respiratory tract, and airborne transmission did occur between pairs of cats. Dogs appeared not to support viral replication well and had low susceptibility to the virus, and pigs, chickens, and ducks were not susceptible to SARS-CoV-2.Science, this issue p. 1016; see also p. 942
Abstract|Severe acute respiratory syndrome–coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes the infectious disease COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019), which was first reported in Wuhan, China, in December 2019. Despite extensive efforts to control the disease, COVID-19 has now spread to more than 100 countries and caused a global pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 is thought to have originated in bats; however, the intermediate animal sources of the virus are unknown. In this study, we investigated the susceptibility of ferrets and animals in close contact with humans to SARS-CoV-2. We found that SARS-CoV-2 replicates poorly in dogs, pigs, chickens, and ducks, but ferrets and cats are permissive to infection. Additionally, cats are susceptible to airborne transmission. Our study provides insights into the animal models for SARS-CoV-2 and animal management for COVID-19 control.
Acknowledgments|We thank S. Watson for editing the manuscript. Funding: This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2020YFC0846500, 2018YFC1200601, and 2016YFD0500301). Author contributions: J.S., Z.W., G.Z., H.Y., C.W., B.H., R.L., X.H., L.S., Z.S., Y.Z., P.L., L.L., P.C., J.W., X.Z., and Y.G. performed experiments; J.S., Z.W., G.Z., H.Y., C.W., W.T., G.W., H.C., and Z.B. analyzed data; and Z.B. and H.C. designed the study and wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: None of the authors have any competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data are available in the manuscript or the supplementary materials. Sequences of the viruses used in this study have been deposited in GISAID previously with the accession numbers EPI_ISL_402119 and EPI_ISL_408514. Two strains of 2019 novel coronavirus (CTan-H and F13-E) were obtained from the China CDC under a material transfer agreement that allows use only in P3+ or P4 facilities, prevents live virus sharing, and prevents commercial use. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. This license does not apply to figures/photos/artwork or other content included in the article that is credited to a third party; obtain authorization from the rights holder before using such material.
Supplementary Materials|science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6494/1016/suppl/DC1Materials and MethodsSupplementary TextFigs. S1 to S10Table S1References and Notes (33–35)MDAR Reproducibility Checklist
References and Notes|1. Zou L., Ruan F., Huang M., Liang L., Huang H., Hong Z., Yu J., Kang M., Song Y., Xia J., Guo Q., Song T., He J., Yen H.-L., Peiris M., Wu J., 
SARS-CoV-2 Viral Load in Upper Respiratory Specimens of Infected Patients. N. Engl. J. Med.
382, 
1177–1179 (2020). 10.1056/NEJMc2001737 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]2. Zhu N., Zhang D., Wang W., Li X., Yang B., Song J., Zhao X., Huang B., Shi W., Lu R., Niu P., Zhan F., Ma X., Wang D., Xu W., Wu G., Gao G. F., Tan W., 
China Novel Coronavirus Investigating and Research Team, A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. N. Engl. J. Med.
382, 
727–733 (2020). 10.1056/NEJMoa2001017 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]3. Zhou P., Yang X.-L., Wang X.-G., Hu B., Zhang L., Zhang W., Si H.-R., Zhu Y., Li B., Huang C.-L., Chen H.-D., Chen J., Luo Y., Guo H., Jiang R.-D., Liu M.-Q., Chen Y., Shen X.-R., Wang X., Zheng X.-S., Zhao K., Chen Q.-J., Deng F., Liu L.-L., Yan B., Zhan F.-X., Wang Y.-Y., Xiao G.-F., Shi Z.-L., 
A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature
579, 
270–273 (2020). 10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]4. Wu F., Zhao S., Yu B., Chen Y.-M., Wang W., Song Z.-G., Hu Y., Tao Z.-W., Tian J.-H., Pei Y.-Y., Yuan M.-L., Zhang Y.-L., Dai F.-H., Liu Y., Wang Q.-M., Zheng J.-J., Xu L., Holmes E. C., Zhang Y.-Z., 
A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature
579, 
265–269 (2020). 10.1038/s41586-020-2008-3 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]5. Wu A., Peng Y., Huang B., Ding X., Wang X., Niu P., Meng J., Zhu Z., Zhang Z., Wang J., Sheng J., Quan L., Xia Z., Tan W., Cheng G., Jiang T., 
Genome Composition and Divergence of the Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Originating in China. Cell Host Microbe
27, 
325–328 (2020). 10.1016/j.chom.2020.02.001 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]6. Wang C., Horby P. W., Hayden F. G., Gao G. F., 
A novel coronavirus outbreak of global health concern. Lancet
395, 
470–473 (2020). 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30185-9 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]7. Pan Y., Zhang D., Yang P., Poon L. L. M., Wang Q., 
Viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples. Lancet Infect. Dis.
20, 
411–412 (2020). 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30113-4 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]8. Pan X., Chen D., Xia Y., Wu X., Li T., Ou X., Zhou L., Liu J., 
Asymptomatic cases in a family cluster with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Lancet Infect. Dis.
20, 
410–411 (2020). 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30114-6 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]9. Lu R., Zhao X., Li J., Niu P., Yang B., Wu H., Wang W., Song H., Huang B., Zhu N., Bi Y., Ma X., Zhan F., Wang L., Hu T., Zhou H., Hu Z., Zhou W., Zhao L., Chen J., Meng Y., Wang J., Lin Y., Yuan J., Xie Z., Ma J., Liu W. J., Wang D., Xu W., Holmes E. C., Gao G. F., Wu G., Chen W., Shi W., Tan W., 
Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: Implications for virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet
395, 
565–574 (2020). 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30251-8 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]10. Liu P., Tan X. Z., 
2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Pneumonia. Radiology
295, 
19 (2020). 10.1148/radiol.2020200257 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]11. Li Q., Guan X., Wu P., Wang X., Zhou L., Tong Y., Ren R., Leung K. S. M., Lau E. H. Y., Wong J. Y., Xing X., Xiang N., Wu Y., Li C., Chen Q., Li D., Liu T., Zhao J., Liu M., Tu W., Chen C., Jin L., Yang R., Wang Q., Zhou S., Wang R., Liu H., Luo Y., Liu Y., Shao G., Li H., Tao Z., Yang Y., Deng Z., Liu B., Ma Z., Zhang Y., Shi G., Lam T. T. Y., Wu J. T., Gao G. F., Cowling B. J., Yang B., Leung G. M., Feng Z., 
Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia. N. Engl. J. Med.
382, 
1199–1207 (2020). 10.1056/NEJMoa2001316 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]12. Huang C., Wang Y., Li X., Ren L., Zhao J., Hu Y., Zhang L., Fan G., Xu J., Gu X., Cheng Z., Yu T., Xia J., Wei Y., Wu W., Xie X., Yin W., Li H., Liu M., Xiao Y., Gao H., Guo L., Xie J., Wang G., Jiang R., Gao Z., Jin Q., Wang J., Cao B., 
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet
395, 
497–506 (2020). 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]13. Guan W. J., Ni Z. Y., Hu Y., Liang W. H., Ou C. Q., He J. X., Liu L., Shan H., Lei C. L., Hui D. S. C., Du B., Li L. J., Zeng G., Yuen K. Y., Chen R. C., Tang C. L., Wang T., Chen P. Y., Xiang J., Li S. Y., Wang J. L., Liang Z. J., Peng Y. X., Wei L., Liu Y., Hu Y. H., Peng P., Wang J. M., Liu J. Y., Chen Z., Li G., Zheng Z. J., Qiu S. Q., Luo J., Ye C. J., Zhu S. Y., Zhong N. S., 
China Medical Treatment Expert Group for Covid-19, Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N. Engl. J. Med. 10.1056/NEJMoa2002032 (2020). 10.1056/NEJMoa2002032 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]14. Chen N., Zhou M., Dong X., Qu J., Gong F., Han Y., Qiu Y., Wang J., Liu Y., Wei Y., Xia J., Yu T., Zhang X., Zhang L., 
Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: A descriptive study. Lancet
395, 
507–513 (2020). 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30211-7 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]15. Chan J. F., Yuan S., Kok K.-H., To K. K.-W., Chu H., Yang J., Xing F., Liu J., Yip C. C.-Y., Poon R. W.-S., Tsoi H.-W., Lo S. K.-F., Chan K.-H., Poon V. K.-M., Chan W.-M., Ip J. D., Cai J.-P., Cheng V. C.-C., Chen H., Hui C. K.-M., Yuen K.-Y., 
A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: A study of a family cluster. Lancet
395, 
514–523 (2020). 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30154-9 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]16. Chan J. F., Kok K.-H., Zhu Z., Chu H., To K. K.-W., Yuan S., Yuen K.-Y., 
Genomic characterization of the 2019 novel human-pathogenic coronavirus isolated from a patient with atypical pneumonia after visiting Wuhan. Emerg. Microbes Infect.
9, 
221–236 (2020). 10.1080/22221751.2020.1719902 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]17. Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses , 
The species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: Classifying 2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Microbiol.
5, 
536–544 (2020). 10.1038/s41564-020-0695-z [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]18. World Health Organization (WHO), “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Situation Report – 51” (WHO, 2020); www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200311-sitrep-51-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=1ba62e57_4. 19See supplementary materials.20. Shi J., Deng G., Kong H., Gu C., Ma S., Yin X., Zeng X., Cui P., Chen Y., Yang H., Wan X., Wang X., Liu L., Chen P., Jiang Y., Liu J., Guan Y., Suzuki Y., Li M., Qu Z., Guan L., Zang J., Gu W., Han S., Song Y., Hu Y., Wang Z., Gu L., Yang W., Liang L., Bao H., Tian G., Li Y., Qiao C., Jiang L., Li C., Bu Z., Chen H., 
H7N9 virulent mutants detected in chickens in China pose an increased threat to humans. Cell Res.
27, 
1409–1421 (2017). 10.1038/cr.2017.129 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]21. Stittelaar K. J., de Waal L., van Amerongen G., Veldhuis Kroeze E. J., Fraaij P. L., van Baalen C. A., van Kampen J. J., van der Vries E., Osterhaus A. D., de Swart R. L., 
Ferrets as a Novel Animal Model for Studying Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections in Immunocompetent and Immunocompromised Hosts. Viruses
8, 
168 (2016). 10.3390/v8060168 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]22. Zhang Q., Shi J., Deng G., Guo J., Zeng X., He X., Kong H., Gu C., Li X., Liu J., Wang G., Chen Y., Liu L., Liang L., Li Y., Fan J., Wang J., Li W., Guan L., Li Q., Yang H., Chen P., Jiang L., Guan Y., Xin X., Jiang Y., Tian G., Wang X., Qiao C., Li C., Bu Z., Chen H., 
H7N9 influenza viruses are transmissible in ferrets by respiratory droplet. Science
341, 
410–414 (2013). 10.1126/science.1240532 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]23. Imai M., Watanabe T., Hatta M., Das S. C., Ozawa M., Shinya K., Zhong G., Hanson A., Katsura H., Watanabe S., Li C., Kawakami E., Yamada S., Kiso M., Suzuki Y., Maher E. A., Neumann G., Kawaoka Y., 
Experimental adaptation of an influenza H5 HA confers respiratory droplet transmission to a reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 virus in ferrets. Nature
486, 
420–428 (2012). 10.1038/nature10831 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]24. Herfst S., Schrauwen E. J. A., Linster M., Chutinimitkul S., de Wit E., Munster V. J., Sorrell E. M., Bestebroer T. M., Burke D. F., Smith D. J., Rimmelzwaan G. F., Osterhaus A. D. M. E., Fouchier R. A. M., 
Airborne transmission of influenza A/H5N1 virus between ferrets. Science
336, 
1534–1541 (2012). 10.1126/science.1213362 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]25. van den Brand J. M., Haagmans B. L., Leijten L., van Riel D., Martina B. E. E., Osterhaus A. D. M. E., Kuiken T., 
Pathology of experimental SARS coronavirus infection in cats and ferrets. Vet. Pathol.
45, 
551–562 (2008). 10.1354/vp.45-4-551 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]26. Martina B. E., Haagmans B. L., Kuiken T., Fouchier R. A. M., Rimmelzwaan G. F., Van Amerongen G., Peiris J. S. M., Lim W., Osterhaus A. D. M. E., 
Virology: SARS virus infection of cats and ferrets. Nature
425, 
915 (2003). 10.1038/425915a [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]27. Chu Y. K., Ali G. D., Jia F., Li Q., Kelvin D., Couch R. C., Harrod K. S., Hutt J. A., Cameron C., Weiss S. R., Jonsson C. B., 
The SARS-CoV ferret model in an infection-challenge study. Virology
374, 
151–163 (2008). 10.1016/j.virol.2007.12.032 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]28. Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team , 
The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID-19) in China. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi
41, 
145–151 (2020) [in Chinese]. 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0254-6450.2020.02.003 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]29. Yan R., Zhang Y., Li Y., Xia L., Guo Y., Zhou Q., 
Structural basis for the recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human ACE2. Science
367, 
1444–1448 (2020). 10.1126/science.abb2762 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]30. Letko M., Marzi A., Munster V., 
Functional assessment of cell entry and receptor usage for SARS-CoV-2 and other lineage B betacoronaviruses. Nat. Microbiol.
5, 
562–569 (2020). 10.1038/s41564-020-0688-y [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]31. The Cell Editorial Team , 
Embracing the Landscape of Therapeutics. Cell
181, 
1–3 (2020). 10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.025 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]32. Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, K. Huang, Y. Yang, X. Hui, J. Gao, X. He, C. Li, W. Gong, Y. Zhang, C. Peng, X. Gao, H. Chen, Z. Zou, Z. Shi, M. Jin, SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing serum antibodies in cats: A serological investigation. bioRxiv (2020). 10.1101/2020.04.01.021196. [CrossRef]33. Yang H., Chen Y., Qiao C., He X., Zhou H., Sun Y., Yin H., Meng S., Liu L., Zhang Q., Kong H., Gu C., Li C., Bu Z., Kawaoka Y., Chen H., 
Prevalence, genetics, and transmissibility in ferrets of Eurasian avian-like H1N1 swine influenza viruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
113, 
392–397 (2016). 10.1073/pnas.1522643113 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]34. Li X., Shi J., Guo J., Deng G., Zhang Q., Wang J., He X., Wang K., Chen J., Li Y., Fan J., Kong H., Gu C., Guan Y., Suzuki Y., Kawaoka Y., Liu L., Jiang Y., Tian G., Li Y., Bu Z., Chen H., 
Genetics, receptor binding property, and transmissibility in mammals of naturally isolated H9N2 Avian Influenza viruses. PLOS Pathog.
10, 
e1004508 (2014). 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004508 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]35. van Riel D., Munster V. J., de Wit E., Rimmelzwaan G. F., Fouchier R. A. M., Osterhaus A. D. M. E., Kuiken T., 
H5N1 Virus Attachment to Lower Respiratory Tract. Science
312, 
399 (2006). 10.1126/science.1125548 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
Abstract|Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) are two highly transmissible and pathogenic viruses that emerged in humans at the beginning of the 21st century. Both viruses likely originated in bats, and genetically diverse coronaviruses that are related to SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV were discovered in bats worldwide. In this Review, we summarize the current knowledge on the origin and evolution of these two pathogenic coronaviruses and discuss their receptor usage; we also highlight the diversity and potential of spillover of bat-borne coronaviruses, as evidenced by the recent spillover of swine acute diarrhoea syndrome coronavirus (SADS-CoV) to pigs.
Introduction|Coronaviruses cause respiratory and intestinal infections in animals and humans1. They were not considered to be highly pathogenic to humans until the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2002 and 2003 in Guangdong province, China2,3,4,5, as the coronaviruses that circulated before that time in humans mostly caused mild infections in immunocompetent people. Ten years after SARS, another highly pathogenic coronavirus, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) emerged in Middle Eastern countries6. SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) uses angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as a receptor and primarily infects ciliated bronchial epithelial cells and type II pneumocytes7,8, whereas MERS-CoV uses dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4; also known as CD26) as a receptor and infects unciliated bronchial epithelial cells and type II pneumocytes9,10,11. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV were transmitted directly to humans from market civets and dromedary camels, respectively12,13,14, and both viruses are thought to have originated in bats15,16,17,18,19,20,21. Extensive studies of these two important coronaviruses have not only led to a better understanding of coronavirus biology but have also been driving coronavirus discovery in bats globally21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31. In this Review, we focus on the origin and evolution of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. Specifically, we emphasize the ecological distribution, genetic diversity, interspecies transmission and potential for pathogenesis of SARS-related coronaviruses (SARSr-CoVs) and MERS-related coronaviruses (MERSr-CoVs) found in bats, as this information can help prepare countermeasures against future spillover and pathogenic infections in humans with novel coronaviruses.
Coronavirus diversity|Coronaviruses are members of the subfamily Coronavirinae in the family Coronaviridae and the order Nidovirales (International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses). This subfamily consists of four genera — Alphacoronavirus, Betacoronavirus, Gammacoronavirus and Deltacoronavirus — on the basis of their phylogenetic relationships and genomic structures (Fig. 1). The alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses infect only mammals. The gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses infect birds, but some of them can also infect mammals24. Alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses usually cause respiratory illness in humans and gastroenteritis in animals. The two highly pathogenic viruses, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, cause severe respiratory syndrome in humans, and the other four human coronaviruses (HCoV-NL63, HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43 and HKU1) induce only mild upper respiratory diseases in immunocompetent hosts, although some of them can cause severe infections in infants, young children and elderly individuals1,28,29. Alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses can pose a heavy disease burden on livestock; these viruses include porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus32, porcine enteric diarrhoea virus (PEDV)33 and the recently emerged swine acute diarrhoea syndrome coronavirus (SADS-CoV)34. On the basis of current sequence databases, all human coronaviruses have animal origins: SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-229E are considered to have originated in bats; HCoV-OC43 and HKU1 likely originated from rodents28,29. Domestic animals may have important roles as intermediate hosts that enable virus transmission from natural hosts to humans. In addition, domestic animals themselves can suffer disease caused by bat-borne or closely related coronaviruses: genomic sequences highly similar to PEDV were detected in bats35,36,37,38, and SADS-CoV is a recent spillover from bats to pigs34 (Fig. 2). Currently, 7 of 11 ICTV-assigned Alphacoronavirus species and 4 of 9 Betacoronavirus species were identified only in bats (Fig. 3). Thus, bats are likely the major natural reservoirs of alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses24.Fig. 1: The genomes, genes and proteins of different coronaviruses.Coronaviruses form enveloped and spherical particles of 100–160 nm in diameter. They contain a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) genome of 27–32 kb in size. The 5'-terminal two-thirds of the genome encodes a polyprotein, pp1ab, which is further cleaved into 16 non-structural proteins that are involved in genome transcription and replication. The 3' terminus encodes structural proteins, including envelope glycoproteins spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M) and nucleocapsid (N). In addition to the genes encoding structural proteins, there are accessory genes that are species-specific and dispensable for virus replication. Here, we compare prototypical and representative strains of four coronavirus genera: feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), Rhinolophus bat coronavirus HKU2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) strains GD02 and SZ3 from humans infected during the early phase of the SARS epidemic and from civets, respectively, SARS-CoV strain hTor02 from humans infected during the middle and late phases of the SARS epidemic, bat SARS-related coronavirus (SARSr-CoV) strain WIV1, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), mouse hepatitis virus (MHV), infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) and bulbul coronavirus HKU11.Full size imageFig. 2: Animal origins of human coronaviruses.Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) is a new coronavirus that emerged through recombination of bat SARS-related coronaviruses (SARSr-CoVs)20. The recombined virus infected civets and humans and adapted to these hosts before causing the SARS epidemic42,62. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) likely spilled over from bats to dromedary camels at least 30 years ago100 and since then has been prevalent in dromedary camels. HCoV-229E and HCoV-NL63 usually cause mild infections in immunocompetent humans. Progenitors of these viruses have recently been found in African bats133,134, and the camelids are likely intermediate hosts of HCoV-229E134,135. HCoV-OC43 and HKU1, both of which are also mostly harmless in humans, likely originated in rodents. Recently, swine acute diarrhoea syndrome (SADS) emerged in piglets. This disease is caused by a novel strain of Rhinolophus bat coronavirus HKU2, named SADS coronavirus (SADS-CoV)34; there is no evidence of infection in humans. Solid arrows indicate confirmed data. Broken arrows indicate potential interspecies transmission. Black arrows indicate infection in the intermediate animals, yellow arrows indicate a mild infection in humans, and red arrows indicate a severe infection in humans or animals.Full size imageFig. 3: Phylogenetic relationships in the Coronavirinae subfamily.The highly human-pathogenic coronaviruses belong to the subfamily Coronavirinae from the family Coronaviridae. The viruses in this subfamily group into four genera (prototype or representative strains shown): Alphacoronavirus (purple), Betacoronavirus (pink), Gammacoronavirus (green) and Deltacoronavirus (blue). Classic subgroup clusters are labelled 1a and 1b for the alphacoronaviruses and 2a–2d for the betacoronaviruses. The tree is based on published trees of Coronavirinae25,136 and reconstructed with sequences of the complete RNA-dependent RNA polymerase-coding region of the representative coronaviruses (maximum likelihood method under the GTR + I + Γ model of nucleotide substitution as implemented in PhyML, version 3.1 (ref.137)). Only nodes with bootstrap support above 70% are shown. IBV, infectious bronchitis virus; MERS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus; MHV, mouse hepatitis virus; PEDV, porcine enteric diarrhoea virus; SARS-CoV, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; SARSr-CoV, SARS-related coronavirus.Full size image
Animal origin and evolution of SARS-CoV|At the beginning of the SARS epidemic, almost all early index patients had animal exposure before developing disease. After the causative agent of SARS was identified, SARS-CoV and/or anti-SARS-CoV antibodies were found in masked palm civets (Paguma larvata) and animal handlers in a market place12,16,39,40,41,42. However, later, wide-reaching investigations of farmed and wild-caught civets revealed that the SARS-CoV strains found in market civets were transmitted to them by other animals16,39. In 2005, two teams independently reported the discovery of novel coronaviruses related to human SARS-CoV, which were named SARS-CoV-related viruses or SARS-like coronaviruses, in horseshoe bats (genus Rhinolophus)15,43. These discoveries suggested that bats may be the natural hosts for SARS-CoV and that civets were only intermediate hosts. Subsequently, many coronaviruses phylogenetically related to SARS-CoV (SARSr-CoVs) were discovered in bats from different provinces in China and also from European, African and Southeast Asian countries15,20,38,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54 (Fig. 4; Supplementary Fig. S1a). According to the ICTV criteria, only the strains found in Rhinolophus bats in European countries, Southeast Asian countries and China are SARSr-CoV variants. Those from Hipposideros bats in Africa are less closely related to SARS-CoV and should be classified as a new coronavirus species54. These data indicate that SARSr-CoVs have wide geographical spread and might have been prevalent in bats for a very long time. A 5-year longitudinal study revealed the coexistence of highly diverse SARSr-CoVs in bat populations in one cave of Yunnan province, China18,20,55. This location is a diversity hot spot, and the SARSr-CoVs in this location contain all the genetic diversity found in other locations of China. Furthermore, the viral strains that exist in this one location contain all genetic elements that are needed to form SARS-CoV (Fig. 5). As no direct progenitor of SARS-CoV was found in bat populations despite 15 years of searching and as RNA recombination is frequent within coronaviruses56, it is highly likely that SARS-CoV newly emerged through recombination of bat SARSr-CoVs in this or other yet-to-be-identified bat caves. This hypothesis is consistent with previous data showing that a direct progenitor of SARS-CoV emerged before 2002 (refs42,57,58). Recombination analysis also strongly supported the hypothesis that the civet SARS-CoV strain SZ3 arose through recombination of two existing bat strains, WIV16 and Rf4092 (ref.20). Furthermore, WIV16, the closest relative to SARS-CoV found in bats, likely arose through recombination of two other prevalent bat SARSr-CoV strains20. The most frequent recombination breakpoints are within the S gene, which encodes the spike (S) protein that contains the receptor-binding domain (RBD), and upstream of orf8, which encodes an accessory protein20,58,59. Given the prevalence and great genetic diversity of bat SARSr-CoVs, their close coexistence and the frequent recombination of the coronaviruses, it is expected that novel variants will emerge in the future60,61. Because there were no SARS cases in Yunnan province during the SARS outbreak, we hypothesize that the direct progenitor of SARS-CoV was produced by recombination within bats and then transmitted to farmed civets or another mammal, which then transmitted the virus to civets by faecal–oral transmission. When the virus-infected civets were transported to Guangdong market, the virus spread in market civets and acquired further mutations before spillover to humans.Fig. 4: Phylogenetic analysis of SARSr-CoVs and MERSr-CoVs.a | The figure shows a simplified phylogenetic tree of severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronaviruses (SARSr-CoVs) from bats. SARSr-CoVs cluster into three lineages, L1–L3, and human severe acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses (SARS-CoVs) embed in L1. Two individual SARSr-CoVs do not cluster into these lineages: YN, a virus isolated from Yunnan province, China, and BG, a virus from Bulgaria, Europe. The tree is based on published trees20,138 and reconstructed using sequences of the complete RNA-dependent RNA polymerase-coding region (maximum likelihood method under the GTR + I + Γ model of nucleotide substitution as implemented in PhyML, version 3.1 (ref.137)).The strain Zhejiang2013 (GenBank No. KF636752) was used as a root. b | By contrast, Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronaviruses (MERSr-CoVs) form two major viral lineages, L1 and L2. L1 is found in humans and camels, and L2 is found only in camels. Two small clusters, B1 (bat 1) and B2, and one single virus, SA, from South Africa, were found in bats. The phylogenetic tree of MERSr-CoVs is based on a published trees94,139 and reconstructed using full-genome alignment of all coding regions using the same method as above. HKU4-1 (EF065505) and HKU5-1 (EF065509), two 2c betacoronaviruses, served as the root of the tree. Detailed phylogenetic trees and grouping information can be found in Supplementary Fig. S1. MERS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus.Full size imageFig. 5: Variable regions in different SARS-CoV and bat SARSr-CoV isolates.Variability and thus species adaptation majorly affect three severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and SARS-related coronavirus (SARSr-CoV) proteins: the spike protein (S) (both the S1 amino-terminal domain (S1-NTD) and the S1 receptor-binding domain (S1-RBD) show variability), ORF3 (3a and 3b) and ORF8 (8a and b). SARS-CoV GD02 and hTor02 represent strains that were isolated from patients during the early, and middle or late phase of the SARS epidemic in 2002–2003, respectively; SARS-CoV CZ3 is a representative of strains isolated from civets in 2003 and 2004 (refs42,62). All bat SARSr-CoVs, except HKU3 and Rp3, were discovered in Yunnan province during 2011–2015. On the basis of deletions in the RBD, bat SARSr-CoVs can be divided into two clades. Those without a deletion and thus an identical size in S1 to SARS-CoV can be further divided into four genotypes: genotype 1, represented by WIV16, is highly similar to SARS-CoV in both the NTD and the RBD; genotype 2, represented by WIV1, differs in NTD from SARS-CoV; genotype 3, represented by Rs4231, differs in RBD from SARS-CoV; and genotype 4, represented by SHC014 and Rs4084, differs in both NTD and RBD from SARS-CoV20. The differences in S influence species-specific receptor binding, whereas differences in the accessory proteins, including potentially the newly discovered ORFX (X), mainly affect immune responses and viral immune evasion. Adapted from ref.20, CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Full size image
Variability of SARS-CoV in humans and civets|The genome sequences of SARS-CoVs from market civets are almost identical to the genomes of human SARS-CoVs42,62. However, two genes show major variation. The first variable region is located in the S gene. The SARS-CoV S protein is functionally divided into two subunits, denoted S1 and S2, which are responsible for receptor binding and fusion with the cellular membrane, respectively1. S1 is further divided into the amino-terminal domain (S1-NTD) and the carboxy-terminal domain (S1-CTD). The S1-CTD functions as the RBD and is responsible for binding ACE2 and entering cells7,63,64. Two amino acid residues in the RBD, 479 and 487, were identified to be essential for ACE2-mediated SARS-CoV infection and critical for virus transmission from civets to humans76,78.The second major location of variation is the accessory gene orf8 (Fig. 5). On the basis of SARS spread, the SARS 2002–2003 outbreak could be divided into three phases, with the early phase characterized by a limited number of localized cases, followed by a middle phase during which a superspreader event occurred in a hospital and finally the late phase of international spread62. The viral genomes from early-phase patients contain two genotypes of orf8, one with a complete orf8 (369 nucleotides) and the other containing an 82-nucleotide deletion. By contrast, viral genomes from late-phase patients and most of the genomes from middle-phase patients contain a split orf8 (orf8a and orf8b) owing to a 29-nucleotide deletion; two exceptions were found in middle-phase genomes, one containing an 82-nucleotide deletion in orf8 and the other with the whole orf8 deleted. The human isolates from 2004 and all civet SARS-CoV genomes have a complete orf8 except one civet strain with an 82-nucleotide deletion62. These data indicate that orf8 genes underwent adaptations during transmission from animals to humans during the SARS epidemic. A limited functional analysis suggested that the ORF8a protein is dispensable for SARS-CoV replication in Vero E6 cells but may have a role in modulating endoplasmic reticulum stress, inducing apoptosis and inhibiting interferon responses in host cells20,65,66,67,68,69. Whether and how these adaptations were involved in SARS-CoV virulence are not fully clarified.
Variability of bat SARSr-CoVs|SARS-CoVs and bat SARSr-CoVs mainly vary in three regions: S, ORF8 and ORF3 (Fig. 5). Bat SARSr-CoVs share high sequence identity with SARS-CoV in the S2 region but are highly variable in the S1 region. Compared with human and civet SARS-CoV, bat SARSr-CoV S1 can be divided into two clades: clade 1, which is found only in Yunnan province, has the same size S protein as human and civet isolates18,19,20,51, whereas clade 2, which is found in many locations, has a shorter size S protein owing to deletions of 5, 12 or 13 amino acids in length15,43,44,45,48,50. Among the sequenced bat SARSr-CoVs, those with deletions in their RBDs show 78.2–80.2% amino acid sequence identity with SARS-CoV in the S protein, whereas those without deletions are much more closely related to SARS-CoV, with 90.0–97.2% amino acid sequence identity.The second variable region is located in ORF8. Most of bat SARSr-CoVs retain an intact orf8 (366 or 369 nucleotides) and share 47.7–100% sequence identity among themselves and 50.6–98.4% with SARS-CoV in civets and early-phase patients. A split orf8 (364 nucleotides) owing to a 5-nucleotide deletion was found in one bat SARSr-CoV strain, similar to that of SARS-CoVs from middle-phase and late-phase patients20. The European bat SARSr-CoV has completely lost orf8 (ref.45). These data show that the orf8 genes in bat SARSr-CoVs are constantly evolving in their natural reservoirs. Considering the variability of orf8 in bats, civets and humans, investigating the function of orf8 is a priority, particularly the contribution of these different variants to viral pathogenesis.The third variable region is in ORF3. The SARS-CoV genome encodes a 154-amino acid ORF3b, which is an interferon antagonist. Bat SARSr-CoVs and SARS-CoV are highly similar in ORF3a (96.4–98.9% amino acid identity), but bat SARSr-CoVs have different sizes of ORF3b (54–154 amino acids) (a large part of the region encoding ORF3b overlaps with the ORF3a coding region)20,70. ORF3b retains the anti-interferon function in some bat SARSr-CoVs but has lost the function in other bat SARSr-CoVs70.A novel accessory gene, named orfx and located between orf6 and orf7, was identified in the genomes of several bat SARSr-CoVs from Yunnan province18,19,20 (Fig. 5). A preliminary study indicated that ORFX is involved in an anti-interferon response71.
Receptor usage of SARS-CoV and SARSr-CoV|ACE2 binding is a critical determinant for the host range of SARS-CoV72,73. Electron microscopic studies have shown that the SARS-CoV S protein forms a clover shaped trimer, with three S1 heads and a trimeric S2 stalk74,75. The RBD is located on the tip of each S1 head. The RBD binds to the outer surface of ACE2, away from its zinc-chelating enzymatic site77,141 (Fig. 6a). Different SARS-CoV strains isolated from several hosts vary in their binding affinities for human ACE2 and consequently in their infectivity of human cells76,78 (Fig. 6b). The epidemic strain hTor02 was isolated from humans during the late phase of the outbreak in 2002–2003. It has a high affinity for human ACE2 and high infectivity in human cells, and consequently, it was transmitted efficiently between humans62. Strains cSz02 and cHb05 were isolated from palm civets in 2002–2003 and 2005, respectively. Both have low affinity for human ACE2 and low infectivity in human cells but have high affinity for civet ACE2 and high infectivity in civet cells12,79. Strain hcGd03 was isolated from both humans and palm civets in 2003–2004 and has moderate affinity for human ACE2 and moderate infectivity in human cells; it infected humans but did not transmit between humans80. Strain hHae08 was isolated from human cell culture and has high affinity for human ACE2 and high infectivity in human cells81. Understanding the molecular basis for human receptor usage by different SARS-CoV strains is crucial for understanding the cross-species transmission of SARS-CoV and for epidemiological monitoring of potential future outbreaks.Fig. 6: Receptor recognition by SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.a | Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) uses its receptor-binding domain (RBD) (as shown in the structure of strain hTor02, containing core structure (cyan) and receptor-binding motif (RBM; magenta)) to bind human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2; green; Protein Data Bank ID: 2AJF). ACE2 is a peptidase with zinc (blue) in its active centre. b | Several residues in the host and viral receptor, as well as two salt bridges that stabilize the structure (dotted lines) and form two binding hot spots, are crucial for binding of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic strain hTor02. Hydrophobic residues surrounding the two salt bridges are present in the structure but are not shown in the figure. c | By contrast, the SARS-related coronavirus (SARSr-CoV) strain bWIV1, which was isolated from bats and can infect both civet and human cells, differs in residues 442, 472 and 487. The mutation from threonine to asparagine in residue 487 introduces a polar side chain and is predicted to interfere with binding at hot spot 353. The model shown here was built on the basis of the structure of hTor02 RBD complexed with human ACE2 (Protein Data Bank ID: 2AJF), in which residues 442, 472 and 487 were mutated from those in strain hTor02 to those in strain bWIV1. d | The bat SARSr-CoV strain bRsSHC014 can also infect human and civet cells; it carries an alanine in position 487, and the short side chain of this residue does not support the structure of hot spot 353. The model was built on the basis of the structure of cOptimize RBD complexed with human ACE2 (Protein Data Bank ID: 3SCJ), in which residues 442, 480 and 487 were mutated from those in strain cOptimize to those in strain bWIV1. e | The Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) RBD (core structure in cyan and RBM in magenta) binds human dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4; green; Protein Data Bank ID: 4KR0). Structure figures were made using PyMOL115. Modelled mutations in panels c and d were performed using Coot140. Panels a–d are adapted from ref.83: this research was originally published in The Journal of Biological Chemistry. Wu, K. L., Peng, G. Q., Wilken, M., Geraghty, R. J. & Li, F. Mechanisms of host receptor adaptation by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. J. Biol. Chem. 2012; 287:8904–8911. © American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.Full size imageSARS-CoV mutations that affect human and civet receptor bindingCrystal structures of the SARS-CoV RBD complexed with human ACE2 revealed that the SARS-CoV RBD contains a core structure and a receptor-binding motif (RBM)82,141 (Fig. 6a). Two virus-binding hot spots have been identified at the interface of the RBD and human ACE2, centring on ACE2 residues Lys31 (hot spot 31) and Lys353 (hot spot 353)83,84 (Fig. 6b). They both consist of a salt bridge (between Lys31 and Glu35 for hot spot 31 and between Lys353 and Asp38 for hot spot 353); both salt bridges are buried in hydrophobic pockets and contribute a substantial amount of energy to RBD–ACE2 binding as well as filling voids at the RBD–ACE2 interface. Naturally selected RBM mutations all interact with the hot spots (Fig. 6b; Table 1) and affect RBD–ACE2 binding.Table 1 Mutations in the receptor-binding motif of SARS-CoVFull size tableMutations in RBM residue 479 had an important role in the civet-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV42,76,78,85. Residue 479 is an asparagine in strains hTor02, hcGd03 and hHae08 but is a lysine in strain cSz02 and an arginine in strain cHb05 (Table 1). Asn479 is located near hot spot 31, without interfering with the structure of hot spot 31 (ref.85) (Fig. 6b, c). However, a change to Lys479 leads to steric and electrostatic interference with hot spot 31, reducing the binding affinity between the SARS-CoV RBD and human ACE2. By contrast, Arg479 reaches the vicinity of hot spot 353 and forms a salt bridge with ACE2 residue Asp38 (ref.83) (Fig. 6d). Hence, strains hTor02, hcGd03 and hHae08 (all of which contain Asn479) and strain cHb05 (which contains Arg479) recognize human ACE2 and infect human cells efficiently, whereas strain cSz02 (which contains Lys479) recognizes human ACE2 inefficiently and infects human cells inefficiently. The above structural analyses are supported by biochemical, functional and epidemiological data42,76,78,83,84,85. Because of residue differences between human ACE2 and civet ACE2, both Asn479 and Lys479 fit well into the interface between the RBD and civet ACE2, although Arg479 fits even better83,85; consequently, strains hTor02, cSz02, hcGd03 and cHb05 (which contain either Asn479, Lys479 or Arg479) recognize civet ACE2 and infect civet cells efficiently79. In sum, Asn479 and Arg479 are viral adaptations to human ACE2, whereas Lys479 is incompatible with human ACE2; Arg479 is a viral adaptation to civet ACE2, whereas Asn479 and Lys479 are also compatible with civet ACE2.Mutations in RBM residue 487 had an important role in the human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV. Residue 487 is a threonine in strain hTor02 but is a serine in the other strains isolated from humans and civets. The methyl group of Thr487 interacts with hot spot 353 in human ACE2 by providing stacking support for the formation of the salt bridge between Lys353 and Asp38; consequently, strain hTor02 recognizes human ACE2 efficiently and was transmitted between humans during the 2002–2003 SARS epidemic. By contrast, Ser487 cannot provide support to hot spot 353, and hence the other strains isolated from humans and civets recognize human ACE2 inefficiently. Consequently, neither cSz02 nor hcGd03 was transmitted between humans. The above structural analyses are supported by biochemical, functional and epidemiological data42,76,78,83,84,85. Because of residue differences between human ACE2 and civet ACE2, Ser487 fits well into the RBD–civet ACE2 interface although still not as well as Thr487 (refs83,85); consequently, strains sSZ02, hcGd03 and cHb05 (which contain Ser487) recognize civet ACE2 and infect civet cells efficiently79. In sum, Thr487 is a viral adaptation to both human and civet ACE2, and Ser487 is much more compatible with civet ACE2 than with human ACE2 (Fig. 6b).RBM residues 442, 472 and 480 also contribute to receptor recognition and host range of SARS-CoV although not as much as residues 479 and 487. Detailed structural, biochemical and functional analyses showed that Phe442, Phe472 and Asp480 are viral adaptations to human ACE2, whereas Tyr442, Leu472 or Pro472, and Gly480 are viral adaptations to civet ACE2 (refs72,83). To corroborate the importance of these residues for SARS-CoV binding to either human or civet ACE2, two SARS-CoV S proteins, hOptimize and cOptimize, were rationally designed: the former contains all of the human ACE2-adapted residues (Phe442, Phe472, Asn479, Asp480 and Thr487), whereas the latter contains the civet ACE2-adapted residues (Tyr442, Pro472, Arg479, Gly480 and Thr487). These two S proteins demonstrate exceptionally high affinity for human ACE2 and civet ACE2, confirming that the human ACE2-adapted and civet ACE2-adapted RBM residues help determine SARS-CoV host range72,83. In addition to receptor binding, proteolytic cleavage of S and potentially other mutations that affect virion and trimer stability may also be important for virus transmissibility in different hosts, and these factors need to be studied further.SARSr-CoV mutations that affect receptor bindingTo date, numerous SARSr-CoV strains have been identified from bats15,16,18,19,20. These bat SARSr-CoVs are the likely progenitors of SARS-CoV that infected humans and civets, and hence understanding their interactions with human or civet ACE2 is critical for tracing the origins of SARS-CoV and for preventing and controlling future SARS-CoV outbreaks in humans. The RBD sequences of these bat SARSr-CoVs fall into three major groups; the representative strains from each group are bHKU3 (isolated in 2005), bWIV1 (isolated in 2013) and bRsSHC014 (isolated in 2013) (Table 1). Strains bWIV1 and bRsSHC014, but not strain bHKU3, use both human and civet ACE2 and hence can infect both human and civet cells16,18,19,20,86,87. Strain bHKU3 has a truncated RBM (Table 1), which distorts the structure of the RBM and abolishes its binding to human and civet ACE2. Neither strain bWIV1 nor strain bRsSHC014 contains truncations in its RBM, and hence, their RBMs likely retain the same structure as SARS-CoV RBMs. Here, we analysed the potential interactions between these two strains (bWIV1 and bRsSHC014) and human ACE2 by building homology structural models of their RBDs complexed with human ACE2, focusing on residues 479 and 487 (Fig. 6c, d). Strain bWIV1 contains Asn479 and Asn487 in its RBM. Whereas Asn479 is a viral adaptation to human ACE2, the polar side chain of Asn487 may have unfavourable interactions with the aliphatic portion of residue Lys353 in human ACE2, which is part of hot spot 353 (Fig. 6c). Strain bRsSHC014 contains Arg479 and Ala487 in its RBM. Whereas Arg479 is a viral adaptation to human ACE2, the small side chain of Ala487 does not provide support to the structure of hot spot 353 (Fig. 6d). Therefore, although both bWIV1 and bRsSHC014 can infect human airway cells, they bind human ACE2 less well than hTor02 and produce less severe symptoms than the epidemic strain of SARS-CoV in vivo88,89. Similarly, both bWIV1 and bRsSHC014 can infect civet cells, but they bind civet ACE2 less well than cSz02. Thus, it is predicted that both strains will be attenuated compared with early-phase or late-phase human SARS epidemic viruses. Future evolution of bat SARSr-CoV strains bWIV1 and bRsSHC014 in crucial RBM residues may allow them to cross the species barriers between bats, civets and humans, posing potential health threats.
Origin and evolution of MERS-CoV|Whereas the emergence of SARS involved palm civets, most of the early MERS index cases had contact with dromedary camels. Indeed, MERS-CoV strains isolated from camels were almost identical to those isolated from humans90,91,92,93,94,95. Moreover, MERS-CoV-specific antibodies were highly prevalent in camels from the Middle East, Africa and Asia13,14,96,97,98,99,100,101,102,103. MERS-CoV infections were detected in camel serum samples collected in 1983 (ref.100), suggesting that MERS-CoV was present in camels at least 30 years ago. Genomic sequence analysis indicated that MERS-CoV, Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4 and Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5 are phylogenetically related (denoted as betacoronavirus lineage C)21. The viruses in this lineage have identical genomic structures and are highly conserved in their polyproteins and most structural proteins, but their S proteins and accessory proteins are highly variable. MERSr-CoVs were found in at least 14 bat species from two bat families, Vespertilionidae and Nycteridae. However, none of these MERSr-CoVs is a direct progenitor of MERS-CoV, as their S proteins differ substantially from that of MERS-CoV98,104,105,106.To understand the evolutionary relationships between MERS-CoV and MERSr-CoVs, we constructed a phylogenetic tree on the basis of the alignment of all the coding regions (Fig. 4b; Supplementary Fig. S1b). The phylogenetic tree contains two main clusters and several small clades or strains. Overall, the genetic diversity within the L1 and L2 viral lineages is low, indicating that humans and camels have been infected by viruses from the same source within a short time period. The L1 viruses include human and camel MERS-CoVs mainly from the Middle East (the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Oman and Jordan) and two Asian countries (South Korea and Thailand) that had caused outbreaks in human populations. It is worth noting that the cases reported in South Korea and Thailand were related to those in the Middle East. The L2 viruses include camel MERS-CoVs from Africa (Nigeria, Burkina Faso and Ethiopia) and one Middle East country (Morocco); these viruses have not caused any human infection. Clearly, these two viral lineages share a common ancestor but have diverged in their potential to cause human infections. The MERSr-CoV strain Neoromicia/5038 (GenBank No. MF593268) isolated in South Africa was the closest relative to MERS-CoVs in the phylogenetic tree. Overall, all the MERSr-CoVs isolated from bats support the hypothesis that MERS-CoV originated from bats. However, given the phylogenetic gap between the bat MERSr-CoVs and human and camel MERS-CoVs, there should be other yet-to-be-identified viruses that are circulating in nature and directly contributed to the emergence of MERS-CoV in humans and camels. Hopefully, such viruses will be found in bats in the future.Not surprisingly, recombination events have taken place in the evolution and emergence of MERS-CoV94,105,107,108,109. Phylogenetic trees constructed using genes encoding orf1ab and S were incongruent with the tree topology of the complete genome, suggesting potential recombination in these genes108. Numerous recombinations imply that MERS-CoV originated from the exchange of genetic elements between different viral ancestors, including those isolated from camels and the assumed natural host bats94,105,107,110,111.
Variability of human and camel MERS-CoV|The full-length genomic sequences of MERS-CoVs isolated from humans and camels are almost identical (>99% identity). The major variations are located in S, ORF4b and ORF3, particularly in African camel MERS-CoVs94. Substitutions of a few amino acid residues were found in the S protein of some camel MERS-CoVs, but none of them was located in the RBD94,112. Neutralization assays indicated that camel sera that are positive for MERS-CoV can completely neutralize the human MERS-CoV strains, suggesting that MERS-CoVs isolated from humans and camels are antigenically similar to each other94. MERS-CoVs from both humans and camels contain variable ORF3 and ORF4 proteins with different lengths owing to either terminal truncations or internal deletions94. ORF4b is known to be an interferon antagonist113,114. MERS-CoV isolates from West African camels with a truncated ORF4b gene replicate less efficiently in human cell culture and are less pathogenic in human DPP4 transgenic mice94. Curiously, deletion of the orf4 gene in the human MERS-CoV strain EMC did not substantially reduce virus replication, although it induced a stronger interferon response94. Another study demonstrated that the deletion of orf3–orf5 dramatically attenuated MERS-CoV virulence, primarily through increased host responses, including disrupted cellular processes, increased activation of the interferon pathway and robust inflammation115.
Variability of bat MERSr-CoVs|To date, bat MERSr-CoVs and human and camel MERS-CoVs share the same genomic structures but differ substantially in their genomic sequences105,106,110,111,116. The highest overall genomic sequence identity between bat MERSr-CoV and human and camel MERS-CoV is ~85%. On the basis of their genomic sequences, several bat MERSr-CoV strains discovered in China, such as Ii-MERSr-CoV, Ve-MERSr-CoV and Hy-MERSr-CoV, have just reached the taxonomic threshold to be considered the same species as MERS-CoV106,110,111.Compared with human and camel MERS-CoV, bat MERSr-CoVs vary most in S and accessory genes. The sequence identity of the S protein between bat MERSr-CoVs and human and camel MERS-CoVs is approximately 45–65%, with even lower sequence identity in the RBD region110,111. The size of these S proteins differs in these strains, mainly because of deletions in their RBD region and/or the S1 and S2 boundary. These deletions are considered to be related to the differences in receptor binding and cell entry111,116. The accessory genes, including those encoding ORF3, ORF4a, ORF4b and ORF5, are also highly variable in length and sequence between bat MERSr-CoVs and human and camel MERS-CoVs, suggesting substantial evolution of these genes in their natural hosts105,106,110,111,116.
Receptor usage of MERS-CoV and MERSr-CoV|In contrast to SARS-CoV, which uses ACE2 as its receptor, MERS-CoV uses DPP4. Similar to SARS-CoV S1-CTD, MERS-CoV S1-CTD functions as the viral RBD10,117. Like the SARS-CoV S1-CTD, the MERS-CoV S1-CTD also contains two subdomains, a core structure and an RBM9,118,119,120 (Fig. 6e). The core structures of these two S1-CTDs are similar to each other, with both containing a five-stranded β-sheet as the main scaffold. However, their RBMs differ substantially: whereas the SARS-CoV RBM mainly contains loops, the MERS-CoV RBM mainly contains a four-stranded β-sheet. The structural differences between MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV RBMs account for the different receptor specificities of the two viruses121.Like the interactions between SARS-CoV and ACE2, the interactions between MERS-CoV and DPP4 have been extensively examined. DPP4 from humans, camels, horses and bats can function as a receptor for MERS-CoV, whereas DPP4 from mice, hamsters and ferrets cannot112,122,123,124,125. Key residue differences between human DPP4 and the DPP4 from other species affect the species specificities of MERS-CoV. For example, two residues (288 and 330) in mouse DPP4 and five residues (291, 295, 336, 341 and 346) in hamster DPP4 are largely responsible for the incompatibility of mouse and hamster DPP4s with MERS-CoV112,123. Mutating these residues to the corresponding residues in human DPP4 makes mouse and hamster DPP4 functional receptors for MERS-CoV. On the other hand, MERS-CoV and MERSr-CoVs have been isolated from camels and bats, respectively. MERS-CoV strains isolated from humans and camels are highly similar to each other, and they both use human DPP4 efficiently112. MERSr-CoVs from bats in general share only ~60–70% sequence identity with MERS-CoV in the RBD, and only some of these bat viruses, including HKU4, recognize DPP4 as the receptor110,111,126. However, they bind DPP4 less efficiently than MERS-CoV. Mutating three residues in the HKU4 RBD (540, 547 and 558) substantially increased its affinity for human DPP4 (ref.127). Overall, as in the case of SARS-CoV, receptor recognition is a crucial determinant of the host range of MERS-CoV.
SADS-CoV|From 28 October 2016 to 2 May 2017, swine acute diarrhoea syndrome (SADS) was observed in four pig breeding farms in Guangdong province, with a mortality up to 90% for piglets 5 days or younger. A novel HKU2-related bat coronavirus, named SADS-CoV, was identified as the causative agent34,128,129. The SADS-CoV isolates from piglets of the four farms were almost identical and shared 95% identity with Rhinolophus bat coronavirus HKU2 (ref.130), indicating the bat origin of this pig virus. Immediately after the SADS outbreak, SADS-related CoVs (SADSr-CoVs) with 96–98% sequence identity to SADS-CoV were detected in 9.8% of anal swabs collected from different Rhinolophus species in Guangdong province during 2013–2016. Although genetically highly similar, bat SADSr-CoVs show high genetic diversity in the S gene, with 72–92% nucleotide and 80–98% amino acid identity to SADS-CoV. Receptor analysis indicated that none of the known coronavirus receptors, ACE2, DPP4 and aminopeptidase N, are essential for SADS-CoV entry34. The mechanism of transmission of SADS-CoV from bats to pigs and the pathogenesis of bat-originated SADSr-CoVs in pigs need further exploration. This is the first documented spillover of a bat coronavirus that caused severe diseases in domestic animals, although molecular evolution data suggested PEDV probably originated in bats37,38.
Conclusions and future perspectives|The collected data on genetic evolution, receptor binding and pathogenesis demonstrated that SARS-CoV most likely originated in bats through sequential recombination of bat SARSr-CoVs. Recombination likely occurred in bats before SARS-CoV was introduced into Guangdong province through infected civets or other infected mammals from Yunnan. The introduced SARS-CoV underwent rapid mutations in S and orf8 and successfully spread in market civets. After several independent spillovers to humans, some of the strains underwent further mutations in S and became epidemic during the SARS outbreak in 2002–2003. However, a recent serological investigation revealed the presence of antibodies against the SARSr-CoV nucleocapsid in humans living around a bat cave but who had not shown clinical signs of disease, suggesting that the virus can infect humans through frequent contact131.A similar scenario might have happened for MERS-CoV. Since its outbreak in 2012, MERSr-CoVs and related viruses (HKU4 and HKU5) have been found in different bat species in five continents17,21,106,110,111,116,126,127,132. The ORF1ab of these viruses is highly similar to MERS-CoV ORF1ab, but they are highly diverse in their S proteins. Surprisingly, some bat MERSr-CoVs and HKU can use the same receptor, DPP4, as MERS-CoV110,111,126,127. Given the massive number of coronaviruses carried by different bat species, the high plasticity in receptor usage and other features such as adaptive mutation and recombination, frequent interspecies transmission from bats to animals and humans is expected.Currently, no clinical treatments or prevention strategies are available for any human coronavirus. Given the conserved RBDs of SARS-CoV and bat SARSr-CoVs, some anti-SARS-CoV strategies in development, such as anti-RBD antibodies or RBD-based vaccines, should be tested against bat SARSr-CoVs. Recent studies demonstrated that anti-SARS-CoV strategies worked against only WIV1 and not SHC014 (refs71,88,89). In addition, little information is available on HKU3-related strains that have much wider geographical distribution and bear truncations in their RBD. Similarly, anti-S antibodies against MERS-CoV could not protect from infection with a pseudovirus bearing the bat MERSr-CoV S 111. Furthermore, little is known about the replication and pathogenesis of these bat viruses. Thus, future work should be focused on the biological properties of these viruses using virus isolation, reverse genetics and in vitro and in vivo infection assays. The resulting data would help the prevention and control of emerging SARS-like or MERS-like diseases in the future.It is widely accepted that many viruses have existed in their natural reservoirs for a very long time. The constant spillover of viruses from natural hosts to humans and other animals is largely due to human activities, including modern agricultural practices and urbanization. Therefore, the most effective way to prevent viral zoonosis is to maintain the barriers between natural reservoirs and human society, in mind of the ‘one health’ concept.
Acknowledgements|This work was jointly funded by the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB29010000), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31621061) and the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Institute of Allergy and Infection Diseases (R01AI110964) to Z.-L.S; NIH grants (R01AI089728 and R01AI110700) to F.L.; the CAS Pioneer Hundred Talents Program to J.C.; and the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) “One-Three-Five” Strategic Program (WIV-135-TP1) to J.C. and Z.-L.S.
Reviewer information
Nature Reviews Microbiology thanks R. Baric, B. Haagmans and K.-Y. Yuen for their contribution to the peer review of this work.

Author information|AffiliationsCAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, ChinaJie Cui & Zheng-Li ShiDepartment of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, MN, USAFang LiAuthorsJie CuiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarFang LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarZheng-Li ShiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsAll authors researched data for the article, contributed substantially to discussion of the content, wrote the article and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to
                Zheng-Li Shi.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information|Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Related links
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses:
http://www.ictvonline.org/

Supplementary information|
Supplementary Information
Glossary|Severe acute respiratory syndrome
A serious form of pneumonia that is characterized by diffuse alveolar damage and that has the potential to progress to acute respiratory distress.
Type II pneumocytes
Epithelial cells that line the lung alveoli; type II cells are round and produce surfactants to lower the surface tension of water and allow the membrane to separate, thereby increasing the capability to exchange gases.
Salt bridge
A structure in proteins that forms a bond between oppositely charged residues that are sufficiently close to each other to experience electrostatic attraction.

Rights and permissions|Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleCui, J., Li, F. & Shi, Z. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses.
                    Nat Rev Microbiol 17, 181–192 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-018-0118-9Download citationPublished: 10 December 2018Issue Date: March 2019DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-018-0118-9
Abstract| A novel human coronavirus that is now named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (formerly called HCoV-19) emerged in Wuhan, China, in late 2019 and is now causing a pandemic.1 We analyzed the aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 and compared it with SARS-CoV-1, the most closely related human coronavirus.2We evaluated the stability of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 in aerosols and on various surfaces and estimated their decay rates using a Bayesian regression model (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this letter at NEJM.org). SARS-CoV-2 nCoV-WA1-2020 (MN985325.1) and SARS-CoV-1 Tor2 (AY274119.3) were the strains used. Aerosols (<5 μm) containing SARS-CoV-2 (105.25 50% tissue-culture infectious dose [TCID50] per milliliter) or SARS-CoV-1 (106.75-7.00 TCID50 per milliliter) were generated with the use of a three-jet Collison nebulizer and fed into a Goldberg drum to create an aerosolized environment. The inoculum resulted in cycle-threshold values between 20 and 22, similar to those observed in samples obtained from the upper and lower respiratory tract in humans.Our data consisted of 10 experimental conditions involving two viruses (SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1) in five environmental conditions (aerosols, plastic, stainless steel, copper, and cardboard). All experimental measurements are reported as means across three replicates.SARS-CoV-2 remained viable in aerosols throughout the duration of our experiment (3 hours), with a reduction in infectious titer from 103.5 to 102.7 TCID50 per liter of air. This reduction was similar to that observed with SARS-CoV-1, from 104.3 to 103.5 TCID50 per milliliter (Figure 1A).SARS-CoV-2 was more stable on plastic and stainless steel than on copper and cardboard, and viable virus was detected up to 72 hours after application to these surfaces (Figure 1A), although the virus titer was greatly reduced (from 103.7 to 100.6 TCID50 per milliliter of medium after 72 hours on plastic and from 103.7 to 100.6 TCID50 per milliliter after 48 hours on stainless steel). The stability kinetics of SARS-CoV-1 were similar (from 103.4 to 100.7 TCID50 per milliliter after 72 hours on plastic and from 103.6 to 100.6 TCID50 per milliliter after 48 hours on stainless steel). On copper, no viable SARS-CoV-2 was measured after 4 hours and no viable SARS-CoV-1 was measured after 8 hours. On cardboard, no viable SARS-CoV-2 was measured after 24 hours and no viable SARS-CoV-1 was measured after 8 hours (Figure 1A).Both viruses had an exponential decay in virus titer across all experimental conditions, as indicated by a linear decrease in the log10TCID50 per liter of air or milliliter of medium over time (Figure 1B). The half-lives of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 were similar in aerosols, with median estimates of approximately 1.1 to 1.2 hours and 95% credible intervals of 0.64 to 2.64 for SARS-CoV-2 and 0.78 to 2.43 for SARS-CoV-1 (Figure 1C, and Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix). The half-lives of the two viruses were also similar on copper. On cardboard, the half-life of SARS-CoV-2 was longer than that of SARS-CoV-1. The longest viability of both viruses was on stainless steel and plastic; the estimated median half-life of SARS-CoV-2 was approximately 5.6 hours on stainless steel and 6.8 hours on plastic (Figure 1C). Estimated differences in the half-lives of the two viruses were small except for those on cardboard (Figure 1C). Individual replicate data were noticeably “noisier” (i.e., there was more variation in the experiment, resulting in a larger standard error) for cardboard than for other surfaces (Fig. S1 through S5), so we advise caution in interpreting this result.We found that the stability of SARS-CoV-2 was similar to that of SARS-CoV-1 under the experimental circumstances tested. This indicates that differences in the epidemiologic characteristics of these viruses probably arise from other factors, including high viral loads in the upper respiratory tract and the potential for persons infected with SARS-CoV-2 to shed and transmit the virus while asymptomatic.3,4 Our results indicate that aerosol and fomite transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is plausible, since the virus can remain viable and infectious in aerosols for hours and on surfaces up to days (depending on the inoculum shed). These findings echo those with SARS-CoV-1, in which these forms of transmission were associated with nosocomial spread and super-spreading events,5 and they provide information for pandemic mitigation efforts.Neeltje van Doremalen, Ph.D.Trenton Bushmaker, B.Sc.National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, MTDylan H. Morris, M.Phil.Princeton University, Princeton, NJMyndi G. Holbrook, B.Sc.National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, MTAmandine Gamble, Ph.D.University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CABrandi N. Williamson, M.P.H.National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, MTAzaibi Tamin, Ph.D.Jennifer L. Harcourt, Ph.D.Natalie J. Thornburg, Ph.D.Susan I. Gerber, M.D.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GAJames O. Lloyd-Smith, Ph.D.University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, Bethesda, MDEmmie de Wit, Ph.D.Vincent J. Munster, Ph.D.National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, MT [email protected]The findings and conclusions in this letter are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Names of specific vendors, manufacturers, or products are included for public health and informational purposes; inclusion does not imply endorsement of the vendors, manufacturers, or products by the CDC or the Department of Health and Human Services.This letter was published on March 17, 2020, at NEJM.org.Dr. van Doremalen, Mr. Bushmaker, and Mr. Morris contributed equally to this letter.
Abstract|Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an acute infection of the respiratory tract that emerged in late 20191,2. Initial outbreaks in China involved 13.8% of cases with severe courses, and 6.1% of cases with critical courses3. This severe presentation may result from the virus using a virus receptor that is expressed predominantly in the lung2,4; the same receptor tropism is thought to have determined the pathogenicity—but also aided in the control—of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 20035. However, there are reports of cases of COVID-19 in which the patient shows mild upper respiratory tract symptoms, which suggests the potential for pre- or oligosymptomatic transmission6,7,8. There is an urgent need for information on virus replication, immunity and infectivity in specific sites of the body. Here we report a detailed virological analysis of nine cases of COVID-19 that provides proof of active virus replication in tissues of the upper respiratory tract. Pharyngeal virus shedding was very high during the first week of symptoms, with a peak at 7.11 × 108 RNA copies per throat swab on day 4. Infectious virus was readily isolated from samples derived from the throat or lung, but not from stool samples—in spite of high concentrations of virus RNA. Blood and urine samples never yielded virus. Active replication in the throat was confirmed by the presence of viral replicative RNA intermediates in the throat samples. We consistently detected sequence-distinct virus populations in throat and lung samples from one patient, proving independent replication. The shedding of viral RNA from sputum outlasted the end of symptoms. Seroconversion occurred after 7 days in 50% of patients (and by day 14 in all patients), but was not followed by a rapid decline in viral load. COVID-19 can present as a mild illness of the upper respiratory tract. The confirmation of active virus replication in the upper respiratory tract has implications for the containment of COVID-19.
Main|There is a close genetic relationship between SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and the causative agent of COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2. The predominant expression of ACE2 in the lower respiratory tract is believed to have determined the natural history of SARS as an infection of the lower respiratory tract5. Although the positive detection of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical specimens from the upper respiratory tract has previously been described9,10, these observations do not address the principal differences between SARS and COVID-19 in terms of clinical pathology. The patients who were studied here were enrolled because they acquired their infections upon known close contact to an index case, thereby avoiding representational biases owing to symptom-based case definitions. All patients were treated in a single hospital in Munich, Germany. Virological testing was done by two closely collaborating laboratories that used the same standards of technology for PCR with reverse transcription (RT–PCR) and virus isolation; these two laboratories confirmed each other’s results in almost all of the individual samples. Owing to the extremely high congruence of results, all data—except for the serological data (which are based on results from one laboratory only)—are presented together. The patients are part of a larger cluster of epidemiologically linked cases that occurred after 23 January 2020 in Munich, as discovered on 27 January (ref. 11). The present study uses samples taken during the clinical course in the hospital, as well as from initial diagnostic testing before admission. In cases in which this initial diagnostic testing was done by other laboratories, the original samples were retrieved and retested under the rigorous quality standards of the present study.
RT–PCR, replication sites and infectivity|To first understand whether the described clinical presentations are solely caused by infection with SARS-CoV-2, samples from all patients were tested against a panel of typical agents of respiratory viral infection, including human coronavirus (HCoV)-HKU1, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-229E, influenza virus A, influenza virus B, phinovirus, enterovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, human parainfluenza viruses 1–4, human metapneumovirus, adenovirus and human bocavirus. No coinfection was detected in any patient.All patients were initially diagnosed by RT–PCR from oro- or nasopharyngeal swab specimens12. Both types of specimen were collected over the whole clinical course in all patients. There were no discernible differences in viral loads or detection rates when comparing naso- and oropharyngeal swabs (Fig. 1b). The earliest swabs were taken on day 1 of symptoms, which were often very mild or prodromal. All swabs from all patients taken between day 1 and day 5 tested positive. The average virus RNA load was 6.76 × 105 copies per whole swab until day 5, and the maximum load was 7.11 × 108 copies per swab. Swab samples taken after day 5 had an average viral load of 3.44 × 105 copies per swab and a detection rate of 39.93%. The last swab sample that tested positive was taken on day 28 after the onset of symptoms. The average viral load in sputum was 7.00 × 106 copies per ml, with a maximum of 2.35 × 109 copies per ml.Fig. 1: Hallmarks of viral shedding in aggregated samples.a, Samples and sample types per day. b, Viral RNA concentrations in samples from the upper respiratory tract. Neg., sample negative for RNA copies. c, Viral RNA concentrations in sputum and stool samples. d, Seroconversion and virus isolation success, dependent on day after the onset of symptoms. Top, fraction of seroconverted patients. Bottom, aggregated results of virus isolation trials. e, Virus isolation success, dependent on viral load. Viral loads were projected to RNA copies per ml (for sputum samples), per swab (for throat swab samples) or per g (for stool samples). f, g, Projected virus isolation success based on probit distributions. The inner lines are probit curves (dose–response rule). The outer dotted lines are 95% confidence interval. For a <5% isolation success, the estimated day was 9.78 (95% confidence interval 8.45–21.78) days after the onset of symptoms, and the estimated RNA concentration for <5% isolation success was estimated to be 5.40 log10(RNA copies per ml) (95% confidence interval −4.11–6.51). h, Subgenomic viral RNA transcripts in relation to viral genomic RNA. Dots represent mean values of RT–PCR data obtained from at least two independent experiments on samples from individual patients. Plots show median values with interquartile ranges.Full size imageBecause swab samples had limited sensitivity for the initial diagnosis of cases of SARS13,14, we analysed the first paired swab and sputum samples taken on the same occasion from seven patients. All samples were taken between 2 and 4 days after the onset of symptoms. In two cases, swab samples had virus concentrations that were clearly higher than those in sputum samples, as indicated by a difference of >3 in the threshold cycle (Ct) value. The opposite was true in two other cases, and the remaining three cases had similar concentrations in both sample types.None of 27 urine samples and none of 31 serum samples tested positive for RNA from SARS-CoV2.To understand infectivity, we attempted live virus isolation on multiple occasions from clinical samples (Fig. 1d). Whereas the virus was readily isolated during the first week of symptoms from a considerable fraction of samples (16.66% of swabs and 83.33% of sputum samples), no isolates were obtained from samples taken after day 8 in spite of ongoing high viral loads.Virus isolation from stool samples was never successful, irrespective of viral RNA concentration, on the basis of a total of 13 samples taken between day 6 and day 12 from 4 patients. The success of virus isolation also depended on viral load: samples that contained <106 copies per ml (or copies per sample) never yielded an isolate. For swab and sputum samples, interpolation based on a probit model was done to obtain laboratory-based infectivity criteria for the discharge of patients (Fig. 1e, f).High viral loads and successful isolation from early throat swabs suggested potential virus replication in tissues of the upper respiratory tract. To obtain proof of active virus replication in the absence of histopathology, we conducted RT–PCR tests to identify viral subgenomic mRNAs directly in clinical samples (Extended Data Fig. 1). Viral subgenomic mRNA is transcribed only in infected cells and is not packaged into virions, and therefore indicates the presence of actively infected cells in samples. Levels of viral subgenomic mRNA were compared against viral genomic RNA in the same sample. In sputum samples taken on day 4 to day 9, during which time active replication in sputum was obvious in all patients as per longitudinal viral load courses (as described in ‘Viral load, antibody response and clinical course’), the ratios of mean normalized subgenomic mRNA per genome were about 0.4% (Fig. 1g). A decline occurred from day 10 to day 11. In throat swabs, all samples taken up to day 5 were in the same range, whereas no subgenomic mRNA was detectable in swabs thereafter. Together, these data indicate the active replication of SARS-CoV-2 in the throat during the first five days after the onset of symptoms. No (or only minimal) indications of replication in stool were obtained by the same method (Fig. 1g).During our study, we sequenced full virus genomes from all patients. A G6446A exchange was first detected in one patient, and later transmitted to other patients in the cluster11. In the first patient, this mutation was found in a throat swab while a sputum sample from the same day showed the original allele (G6446). The single-nucleotide polymorphism was analysed by RT–PCR and Sanger sequencing in all sequential samples available from that patient (Table 1). The presence of separate genotypes in throat swabs and sputum strongly supported our suspicion of independent virus replication in the throat, rather than passive shedding to the throat from the lung.Table 1 Single-nucleotide polymorphism at genome position 6446 in clinical samples from patient no. 4Full size table
Viral load, antibody response and clinical course|Daily measurements of viral load in sputum, pharyngeal swabs and stool are summarized in Fig. 2. In general, the concentrations of viral RNA were very high in initial samples. In all patients except one, the concentration of viral RNA in throat swabs seemed to be already on the decline at the time of first presentation. Viral RNA concentrations in sputum declined more slowly, with a peak during the first week of symptoms in three out of eight patients. Viral RNA concentrations in stools were also high. In many cases, the course of viral RNA concentration in stools seemed to reflect the course in sputum (Fig. 2a–c). In only one case did independent replication in the intestinal tract seem obvious from the course of stool RNA excretion (Fig. 2d). Whereas symptoms mostly waned until the end of the first week (Table 2), viral RNA remained detectable in throat swabs well into the second week. Stool and sputum samples remained RNA-positive over three weeks in six of the nine patients, in spite of full resolution of symptoms.Fig. 2: Viral load kinetics, seroconversion and clinical observations in individual cases.a–i, The panels correspond to patients no. 1 (a), 2 (b), 3 (c), 4 (d), 7 (e), 8 (f), 10 (g), 14 (h) and 16 (i) in a previous publication11. Dotted lines, limit of quantification. Experiments were performed in duplicate and the data presented are the mean of results obtained by two laboratories independently. PRNT90, serum dilution that causes viral plaque reduction of 90%.Full size imageTable 2 Clinical characteristics of all patientsFull size tableAll cases had comparatively mild courses (Table 2). The two patients who showed some signs of lung infection were the only cases in which sputum viral loads showed a late and high peak around day 10 or 11, whereas sputum viral loads were on the decline by this time in all other patients (Fig. 2f, g). Of note, four out of nine patients showed a loss of taste and olfactory sensation, and described this loss to be stronger and more long-lasting than in common cold diseases.Seroconversion was detected by IgG and IgM immunofluorescence using cells that express the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 and a virus neutralization assay using SARS-CoV-2 (Table 3, Extended Data Fig. 2). Seroconversion in 50% of patients occurred by day 7, and in all patients by day 14 (Fig. 1d). No viruses were isolated after day 7. All patients showed detectable neutralizing antibodies, the titres of which did not suggest close correlation with clinical courses. Of note, patient no. 4, who showed the lowest virus neutralization titre at end of week 2, seemed to shed virus from stool over a prolonged time (Fig. 2d). Results from the differential recombinant immunofluorescence assay indicated cross-reactivity or cross-stimulation against the four endemic human coronaviruses in several patients (Extended Data Table 1).Table 3 IgG and IgM immunofluorescence titres against SARS-CoV-2, from all patientsFull size table
Conclusions|The clinical courses in the patients under study—all of whom were young- to middle-aged professionals without notable underlying disease—were mild. Apart from one patient, all cases were first tested when symptoms were still mild or in the prodromal stage (a period in which most patients would present once there is general awareness of a circulating pandemic disease5). Diagnostic testing suggests that simple throat swabs will provide sufficient sensitivity at this stage of infection. This is in stark contrast to SARS; for instance, only 38 of 98 nasal or nasopharyngeal swab samples tested positive by RT–PCR in patients with SARS in Hong Kong15. Viral load also differs considerably between SARS and COVID-19. For SARS, it took 7 to 10 days after the onset of symptoms until peak RNA concentrations (of up to 5 × 105 copies per swab) were reached13,14. In the present study, peak concentrations were reached before day 5, and were more than 1,000 times higher. Successful isolation of live virus from throat swabs is another notable difference between COVID-19 and SARS, for which such isolation was rarely successful16,17,18. This suggests active virus replication in tissues of the upper respiratory tract, where SARS-CoV is not thought to replicate in spite of detectable ACE2 expression19,20. At the same time, the concurrent use of ACE2 as a receptor by SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 corresponds to a highly similar excretion kinetic in sputum, with active replication in the lung. SARS-CoV was previously found13 in sputum at mean concentrations of 1.2–2.8 × 106 copies per ml, which corresponds to observations made here.Whereas proof of replication by histopathology is awaited, extended tissue tropism of SARS-CoV-2 with replication in the throat is strongly supported by our studies of cells that transcribe subgenomic mRNA in throat swab samples, particularly during the first 5 days of symptoms. Notable additional evidence for independent replication in the throat is provided by sequence findings in one patient, who consistently showed a distinct virus in the throat as opposed to the lung. In addition, the disturbance of gustatory and olfactory senses points at an infection of the tissues of the upper respiratory tract.Critically, the majority of patients in the present study seemed to be beyond their shedding peak in samples from the upper respiratory tract when they were first tested, whereas the shedding of infectious virus in sputum continued throughout the first week of symptoms. Together, these findings suggest a more efficient transmission of SARS-CoV-2 than SARS-CoV, through active pharyngeal viral shedding at a time at which symptoms are still mild and typical of infections of the upper respiratory tract. Later in the disease, COVID-19 resembles SARS in terms of replication in the lower respiratory tract. Of note, the two patients who showed some symptoms of the lungs being affected showed a prolonged viral load in sputum. Our study is limited, in that no severe cases were observed. Future studies that include severe cases should look at the prognostic value of an increase of viral load beyond the end of week 1, potentially indicating an aggravation of symptoms.One of the most interesting hypotheses to explain the potential extension of tropism to the throat is the presence of a polybasic furin-type cleavage site at the S1–S2 junction in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein that is not present in SARS-CoV17. The insertion of a polybasic cleavage site in the S1–S2 region in SARS-CoV has previously been shown to lead to a moderate, but discernible, gain-of-fusion activity that might result in increased viral entry in tissues with a low density of ACE2 expression21.The combination of very high concentrations of virus RNA and the occasional detection of cells in stools that contain subgenomic mRNA indicate active replication in the gastrointestinal tract. Active replication is also suggested by a much higher detection rate compared to the Middle East respiratory system coronavirus (MERS-CoV), for which stool-associated RNA was found in only 14.6% of samples from 37 patients hospitalized in Riyadh (Saudi Arabia)22,23. If SARS-CoV-2 was only passively present in the stool (such as after swallowing respiratory secretions), similar detection rates as for MERS-CoV would be expected. Replication in the gastrointestinal tract is also supported by analogy with SARS-CoV, which was regularly excreted in stool (from which it could be isolated in cell culture24). Our failure to isolate live SARS-CoV-2 from stools may be due to the mild courses of cases, with only one case showing intermittent diarrhoea. In China, diarrhoea was seen in only 2 of 99 cases25. Further studies should therefore address whether SARS-CoV-2 shed in stools is rendered noninfectious though contact with the gut environment. Our initial results suggest that measures to contain viral spread should aim at droplet-, rather than fomite-, based transmission.The prolonged viral shedding in sputum is relevant not only for the control of infections in hospitals, but also for discharge management. In a situation characterized by a limited capacity of hospital beds in infectious disease wards, there is pressure for early discharge after treatment. On the basis of the present findings, early discharge with ensuing home isolation could be chosen for patients who are beyond day 10 of symptoms and have less than 100,000 viral RNA copies per ml of sputum. Both criteria predict that there is little residual risk of infectivity, on the basis of cell culture.The serological courses of all patients suggest a timing of seroconversion similar to, or slightly earlier than, in SARS-CoV infection18. Seroconversion in most cases of SARS occurred during the second week of symptoms. As in SARS and MERS, IgM was not detected considerably earlier than IgG in immunofluorescence; this might in part be due to technical reasons, as the higher avidity of IgG antibodies outcompetes IgM for viral epitopes in the assay. IgG depletion can only partially alleviate this effect. Because immunofluorescence assay is a labour-intensive method, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay tests should be developed as a screening test. Neutralization testing is necessary to rule out cross-reactive antibodies directed against endemic human coronaviruses. On the basis of the frequently low neutralizing antibody titres observed in coronavirus infection26,27, we have here developed a particularly sensitive plaque-reduction neutralization assay. Considering the titres we observed, a simpler microneutralization test format is likely to provide sufficient sensitivity in routine application and population studies.When aligned to viral load courses, it seems there is no abrupt virus elimination at the time of seroconversion. Rather, seroconversion early in week 2 coincides with a slow but steady decline of viral load in sputum. Whether properties such as the glycosylation pattern at critical sites of the glycoprotein have a role in the attenuation of the neutralizing antibody response needs further clarification. In any case, vaccine approaches targeting mainly the induction of antibody responses should aim to induce particularly strong antibody responses to be effective.
Methods|No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.Clinical samples and viral load conversionSputum and stool samples were taken and shipped in native conditions. Oro- and nasopharyngeal throat swabs were preserved in 3 ml of viral transport medium. Viral loads in sputum samples were projected to RNA copies per ml, in stool samples to copies per g and in throat swabs to copies per 3 ml, assuming that all sample components were suspended in 3 ml viral transport medium. For swab samples suspended in less than 3 ml viral transport medium, this conversion was adapted to represent copies per whole swab. An aggregated overview of samples received per day after the onset of disease from all patients is shown in Fig. 1a.RT–PCR for SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory virusesRT–PCR used targets in the E and RdRp genes as previously described12. Both laboratories used a pre-formulated oligonucleotide mixture (Tib-Molbiol) to make the laboratory procedures more reproducible. All patients were also tested for other respiratory viruses, including HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-229E, influenza virus A, influenza virus B, rhinovirus, enterovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, human parainfluenza viruses 1–4, human metapneumovirus, adenovirus and human bocavirus using LightMix-Modular Assays (Roche). Additional technical details are provided in Supplementary Methods section 1.Virus isolationVirus isolation was done in two laboratories on Vero E6 cells. In brief, 100 μl of suspended, cleared and filtered clinical sample was mixed with an equal volume of cell culture medium. Supernatant was collected after 0, 1, 3 and 5 days and used in RT–PCR analysis. Additional technical details are provided in Supplementary Methods section 2a.SerologyWe performed recombinant immunofluorescence assays to determine the specific reactivity against recombinant spike proteins in VeroB4 cells, as previously described26,28. This assay used a cloned coronavirus spike protein from HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-HKU1 or SARS-CoV-2. The screening dilution was 1:10. Plaque reduction neutralization tests were done essentially as previously described for MERS-CoV26. Serum dilutions causing plaque reductions of 90% (PRNT90) and 50% (PRNT50) were recorded as titres. Additional technical details are provided in Supplementary Methods section 2b, c.Statistical analysesStatistical analyses were done using SPSS software (version 25) or GrapPad Prism (version 8).Ethical approval statementAll patients provided informed consent for the use of their data and clinical samples for the purposes of the present study. Institutional review board clearance for the scientific use of patient data has been granted to the treating institution by the ethics committee at the Medical Faculty of the Ludwig Maximillians Universität Munich (vote 20-225 KB).Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability|
Sequence data are available in Gisaid under accession number EPI_ISL_406862. All other data are available from C.D. upon reasonable request.

Acknowledgements|This work was funded by grants from the German Ministry of Research (01KI1723A) and the European Union (602525) to C.D. as well as by the German Bundeswehr Medical Service Biodefense Research Program. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis or decision to publish. We thank P. Mackeldanz, E. Möncke-Buchner, A. Richter, M. Schmidt and J. Beheim-Schwarzbach for technical assistance.
Author information|Author notesThese authors contributed equally: Roman Wölfel, Victor M. Corman, Wolfgang GuggemosThese authors jointly supervised this work: Christian Drosten, Clemens WendtnerAffiliationsBundeswehr Institute of Microbiology, Munich, GermanyRoman Wölfel, Sabine Zange, Patrick Vollmar, Rosina Ehmann & Katrin ZwirglmaierCharité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, GermanyVictor M. Corman, Marcel A. Müller, Daniela Niemeyer, Terry C. Jones, Tobias Bleicker, Sebastian Brünink, Julia Schneider & Christian DrostenKlinikum München-Schwabing, Munich, GermanyWolfgang Guggemos, Michael Seilmaier & Clemens WendtnerCenter for Pathogen Evolution, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKTerry C. JonesUniversity Hospital LMU Munich, Munich, GermanyCamilla Rothe & Michael HoelscherAuthorsRoman WölfelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarVictor M. CormanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarWolfgang GuggemosView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMichael SeilmaierView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSabine ZangeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMarcel A. MüllerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarDaniela NiemeyerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarTerry C. JonesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarPatrick VollmarView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarCamilla RotheView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMichael HoelscherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarTobias BleickerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSebastian BrüninkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJulia SchneiderView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarRosina EhmannView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKatrin ZwirglmaierView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarChristian DrostenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarClemens WendtnerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsR.W. and V.M.C. planned and supervised laboratory testing, and evaluated data. W.G. and M.S. managed patients and evaluated clinical data. S.Z., T.B., S.B., J.S., R.E. and K.Z. performed laboratory testing. M.A.M. managed serological laboratory testing. D.N. managed and performed virus isolation studies. T.C.J. analysed sequences and population-specific polymorphisms. P.V. managed laboratory testing. C.R. managed initial patient contacts. M.H. managed initial patient contacts and evaluated clinical data. C.D. designed and supervised laboratory studies, and wrote the manuscript. C.W. designed and supervised clinical management and clinical data.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Christian Drosten or Clemens Wendtner.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information|Peer review information Nature thanks Peter Openshaw and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Extended data figures and tables|Extended Data Fig. 1 Sequence analysis of E gene subgenomic mRNA.The leader sequence (purple), putative transcription regulatory sequences (TRS) (grey) and nucleotides coding for the 5′-proximal part of the E gene (yellow box) are shown. PCR primer binding sites used for amplification and RT–PCR detection are shown as green arrows, and the 5′-nuclease PCR probe is shown as a red arrow.Extended Data Fig. 2 Recombinant SARS-CoV-2-spike-based immunofluorescence test shows seroconversion of patient no. 4.Representative outcome of a recombinant immunofluorescence test using serum dilutions 1:10, 1:100, 1:1,000 and 1:10,000 of patient no. 4 at 5 and 17 days after the onset of symptoms. Secondary detection was done by using a goat-anti human immunoglobulin labelled with Alexa Fluor 488 (shown in green). The experiment was performed in duplicate.Extended Data Table 1 IgG immunofluorescence titres against endemic human coronavirusesFull size table
Supplementary information|
Supplementary InformationThis file contains Supplementary Methods, which include a description of RNA extraction and RT-PCR methods, a description of cell culture and antibody detection methods and Supplementary References.Reporting Summary
Rights and permissions|Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleWölfel, R., Corman, V.M., Guggemos, W. et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019.
                    Nature 581, 465–469 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2196-xDownload citationReceived: 01 March 2020Accepted: 24 March 2020Published: 01 April 2020Issue Date: 28 May 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x
Further reading|g





                  Mask wearing in pre-symptomatic patients prevents SARS-CoV-2 transmission: An epidemiological analysis
                


Lu-Xiao Hong, Aifen Lin, Ze-Bao He, Hai-Hong Zhao, Jian-Gang Zhang, Chao Zhang, Ling-Jun Ying, Zheng-Ming Ge, Xia Zhang, Qiu-Yue Han, Qiong-Yuan Chen, Yao-Han Ye, Jian-Sheng Zhu, Hai-Xiao Chen & Wei-Hua Yan

Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease
                (2020)
              




                  Considering how biological sex impacts immune responses and COVID-19 outcomes
                


Eileen P. Scully, Jenna Haverfield, Rebecca L. Ursin, Cara Tannenbaum & Sabra L. Klein

Nature Reviews Immunology
                (2020)
              




                  Immunological and inflammatory profiles in mild and severe cases of COVID-19
                


Jin-Wen Song, Chao Zhang, Xing Fan, Fan-Ping Meng, Zhe Xu, Peng Xia, Wen-Jing Cao, Tao Yang, Xiao-Peng Dai, Si-Yu Wang, Ruo-Nan Xu, Tian-Jun Jiang, Wen-Gang Li, Da-Wei Zhang, Peng Zhao, Ming Shi, Chiara Agrati, Giuseppe Ippolito, Markus Maeurer, Alimuddin Zumla, Fu-Sheng Wang & Ji-Yuan Zhang

Nature Communications
                (2020)
              




                  Pharmacological and non-pharmacological efforts at prevention, mitigation, and treatment for COVID-19
                


Mohammed M. Alvi, Sowmya Sivasankaran & Mahima Singh

Journal of Drug Targeting
                (2020)
              




                  Speech-Language Pathology Guidance for Tracheostomy During the COVID-19 Pandemic: An International Multidisciplinary Perspective
                


Charissa J. Zaga, Vinciya Pandian, Martin B. Brodsky, Sarah Wallace, Tanis S. Cameron, Caroline Chao, Lisa Ann Orloff, Naomi E. Atkins, Brendan A. McGrath, Cathy L. Lazarus, Adam P. Vogel & Michael J. Brenner

American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology
                (2020)
              




Comments|By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.
Abstract|Carotenoids are colored compounds produced by plants, fungi, and microorganisms and are required in the diet of most animals for oxidation control or light detection. Pea aphids display a red-green color polymorphism, which influences their susceptibility to natural enemies, and the carotenoid torulene occurs only in red individuals. Unexpectedly, we found that the aphid genome itself encodes multiple enzymes for carotenoid biosynthesis. Phylogenetic analyses show that these aphid genes are derived from fungal genes, which have been integrated into the genome and duplicated. Red individuals have a 30-kilobase region, encoding a single carotenoid desaturase that is absent from green individuals. A mutation causing an amino acid replacement in this desaturase results in loss of torulene and of red body color. Thus, aphids are animals that make their own carotenoids.
Abstract|In vitro synthesis of endoplasmic reticulum-derived transport vesicles has been reconstituted with washed membranes and three soluble proteins (Sar1p, Sec13p complex, and Sec23p complex). Vesicle formation requires GTP but can be driven by nonhydrolyzable analogs such as GMP-PNP. However, GMP-PNP vesicles fail to target and fuse with the Golgi complex whereas GTP vesicles are functional. All the cytosolic proteins required for vesicle formation are retained on GMP-PNP vesicles, while Sar1p dissociates from GTP vesicles. Thin section electron microscopy of purified preparations reveals a uniform population of 60-65 nm vesicles with a 10 nm thick electron dense coat. The subunits of this novel coat complex are molecularly distinct from the constituents of the nonclathrin coatomer involved in intra-Golgi transport. Because the overall cycle of budding driven by these two types of coats appears mechanistically similar, we propose that the coat structures be called COPI and COPII.
Abstract|Brain-machine interfaces hold promise for the restoration of sensory and motor function and the treatment of neurological disorders, but clinical brain-machine interfaces have not yet been widely adopted, in part, because modest channel counts have limited their potential. In this white paper, we describe Neuralink’s first steps toward a scalable high-bandwidth brain-machine interface system. We have built arrays of small and flexible electrode “threads,” with as many as 3072 electrodes per array distributed across 96 threads. We have also built a neurosurgical robot capable of inserting six threads (192 electrodes) per minute. Each thread can be individually inserted into the brain with micron precision for avoidance of surface vasculature and targeting specific brain regions. The electrode array is packaged into a small implantable device that contains custom chips for low-power on-board amplification and digitization: The package for 3072 channels occupies less than 23×18.5×2 mm3. A single USB-C cable provides full-bandwidth data streaming from the device, recording from all channels simultaneously. This system has achieved a spiking yield of up to 70% in chronically implanted electrodes. Neuralink’s approach to brain-machine interface has unprecedented packaging density and scalability in a clinically relevant package.Keywords: brain-machine interface, sensory function, motor function, neurology
Introduction|Brain-machine interfaces have the potential to help people with a wide range of clinical disorders. For example, researchers have demonstrated human neuroprosthetic control of computer cursors [1-3], robotic limbs [4,5], and speech synthesizers [6] by using no more than 256 electrodes. Although these successes suggest that high-fidelity information transfer between brains and machines is possible, development of brain-machine interface has been critically limited by the inability to record from large numbers of neurons. Noninvasive approaches can record the average of millions of neurons through the skull, but this signal is distorted and nonspecific [7,8]. Invasive electrodes placed on the surface of the cortex can record useful signals, but they are limited in that they average the activity of thousands of neurons and cannot record signals deep in the brain [9]. Most brain-machine interfaces have used invasive techniques, because the most precise readout of neural representations requires recording single action potentials from neurons in distributed, functionally linked ensembles [10].Microelectrodes are the gold-standard technology for recording action potentials, but there is no clinically translatable microelectrode technology for large-scale recordings [11]. This would require a system with material properties that provide high biocompatibility, safety, and longevity. Moreover, this device would also need a practical surgical approach and high-density, low-power electronics to ultimately facilitate fully implanted wireless operation.Most devices for long-term neural recording are arrays of electrodes made from rigid metals or semiconductors [12-18]. Although rigid metal arrays facilitate penetrating the brain, the size, Young modulus, and bending stiffness mismatches between stiff probes and brain tissue can drive immune responses that limit the function and longevity of these devices [19,11]. Furthermore, the fixed geometry of these arrays constrains the populations of neurons that can be accessed, especially due to the presence of vasculature.An alternative approach is to use thin, flexible multielectrode polymer probes [20,21]. The smaller size and increased flexibility of these probes should offer greater biocompatibility. However, a drawback of this approach is that thin polymer probes are not stiff enough to directly insert into the brain; their insertion must be facilitated by stiffeners [22,21], injection [23,24], or other approaches [25], all of which are quite slow [26,27]. To satisfy the functional requirements for a high-bandwidth brain-machine interface, while taking advantage of the properties of thin-film devices, we developed a robotic approach, where large numbers of fine and flexible polymer probes are efficiently and independently inserted across multiple brain regions [28].Here, we report Neuralink’s progress toward a flexible, scalable brain-machine interface that increases channel count by an order of magnitude over prior work. Our system has three main components: ultra-fine polymer probes, a neurosurgical robot, and custom high-density electronics (all of which are described below). We demonstrate the rapid implantation of 96 polymer threads, each thread with 32 electrodes, yielding a total of 3072 electrodes.We developed miniaturized custom electronics that allow us to stream full broadband electrophysiology data simultaneously from all these electrodes (described below). We packaged this system for long-term implantation and developed custom online spike-detection software that can detect action potentials with low latency. Together, this system serves as a state-of-the-art research platform and the first prototype toward a fully implantable human brain-machine interface.
Threads|We have developed a custom process to fabricate minimally displacive neural probes that employ a variety of biocompatible thin film materials. The main substrate and dielectric used in these probes is polyimide, which encapsulates a gold thin film trace. Each thin film array is composed of a “thread” area that features electrode contacts and traces and a “sensor” area where the thin film interfaces with custom chips that enable signal amplification and acquisition. A wafer-level microfabrication process enables high-throughput manufacturing of these devices. Ten thin film devices are patterned on a wafer, each with 3072 electrode contacts.Each array has 48 or 96 threads, each of which contain 32 independent electrodes. Integrated chips are bonded to the contacts on the sensor area of the thin film using a flip-chip bonding process. One goal of this approach is to maintain a small thread cross-sectional area to minimize tissue displacement in the brain. To achieve this, while keeping the channel count high, stepper lithography and other microfabrication techniques are used to form the metal film at submicron resolution.We have designed and manufactured over 20 different thread and electrode types into our arrays; two example designs are shown in Figure 1A and B. Probes are designed either with the reference electrodes on separate threads or on the same threads as the recording electrodes (referred to as “on-probe references”). We have fabricated threads ranging from 5 µm to 50 µm in width that incorporate recording sites of several geometries (Figure 1). Thread thickness is nominally 4-6 µm, which includes up to three layers of insulation and two layers of conductor. Typical thread length is approximately 20 mm. To manage these long, thin threads prior to insertion, parylene-c is deposited onto the threads to form a film on which the threads remain attached until the surgical robot pulls them off. Each thread ends in a 16×50 µm2 loop to accommodate needle threading.Open in a separate windowFigure 1Our novel polymer probes. (A) “Linear Edge” probes, with 32 electrode contacts spaced by 50 μm. (B) “Tree” probes with 32 electrode contacts spaced by 75 μm. (C) Increased magnification of individual electrodes for the thread design in panel A, emphasizing their small geometric surface area. (D) Distribution of electrode impedances (measured at 1 kHz) for two surface treatments: PEDOT (n=257) and IrOx (n=588). IrOx: iridium oxide; PEDOT: poly-ethylenedioxythiophene; PCB: printed circuit board.Since the individual gold electrode sites have small geometric surface areas (Figure 1C), we use surface modifications to lower the impedance for electrophysiology and increase the effective charge-carrying capacity of the interface (Figure 1D). Two such treatments that we have used are the electrically conductive polymer poly-ethylenedioxythiophene doped with polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) [29,30] and iridium oxide (IrOx) [31,32]. In benchtop testing, we have achieved impedances of 36.97 (SD 4.68) kΩ (n=257 electrodes) and 56.46 (SD 7.10) kΩ (n=588) for PEDOT:PSS and IrOx, respectively. The lower impedance of PEDOT:PSS is promising; however, the long-term stability and biocompatibility of PEDOT:PSS are less well established than those for IrOx. These techniques and processes can be improved and further extended to other types of conductive electrode materials and coatings.To keep the electronics package small, a novel alignment and flip-chip bonding process was developed. Multilevel gold stud bumps are placed throughout the printed circuit board (PCB) to act as alignment guides and temporary holders for the thin film. A custom shuttle is used to handle, align, and place the thin film on the PCB such that holes in the thin film slide around the stud bumps. The thin film is secured into place by applying force to the gold stud bumps, which flattens them into rivets. Next, the integrated chips are bonded directly to both contacts on the sensor area of the thin film and pads on the PCB by using standard flip-chip bonding processes. A custom silicon shuttle is used to vacuum pick-up rows of 40-50 capacitors and bond a total of 192 capacitors onto the PCB. This alignment and bonding process was key to creating a package containing 3072 channels in a 23×18.5 mm2 footprint.
Robot|Thin-film polymers have previously been used for electrode probes [21], but their low bending stiffness complicates insertions. Neuralink has developed a robotic insertion approach for inserting flexible probes [28], allowing rapid and reliable insertion of large numbers of polymer probes targeted to avoid vasculature and record from dispersed brain regions. The robot’s insertion head is mounted on a globally accurate, 400×400×150 mm travel, 10-µm three-axis stage and holds a small, quick-swappable “needle-pincher” assembly (Figures 2 and ​and33A).Open in a separate windowFigure 2Needle pincher cartridge compared with a penny for scale. (A) Needle. (B) Pincher. (C) Cartridge.Open in a separate windowFigure 3Insertion process into an agarose brain proxy. (1) The inserter approaches the brain proxy with a thread. (i) needle and cannula. (ii) Previously inserted thread. (2) Inserter touches down on the brain proxy surface. (3) Needle penetrates tissue proxy, advancing the thread to the desired depth. (iii) Inserting thread. (4) Inserter pulls away, leaving the thread behind in the tissue proxy. (iv) Inserted thread.The needle is milled from 40-µm diameter tungsten-rhenium wire-stock electrochemically etched to 24-µm diameter along the inserted length (Figure 2A). The tip of the needle is designed both to hook onto insertion loops—for transporting and inserting individual threads—and to penetrate the meninges and brain tissue. The needle is driven by a linear motor, allowing variable insertion speeds and rapid retraction acceleration (up to 30,000 mm/s2) to encourage separation of the probe from the needle. The pincher is a 50-µm tungsten wire bent at the tip and driven both axially and rotationally (Figure 2B). It serves as a support for probes during transport and as a guide to ensure that threads are inserted along the needle path. Figure 3 shows a sequence of photographs of the insertion process into an agarose brain proxy.The inserter head also holds an imaging stack (Figure 4E-G) used for guiding the needle into the thread loop, insertion targeting, live insertion viewing, and insertion verification. In addition, the inserter head contains six independent light modules, each capable of independently illuminating with 405 nm, 525 nm, and 650 nm or white light (Figure 4C). The 405-nm illumination excites fluorescence from polyimide and allows the optical stack and computer vision to reliably localize the 16×50 µm2 thread loop and execute submicron visual servoing to guide, while illuminated by 650 nm light, the needle through it. Stereoscopic cameras, software-based monocular extended depth-of-field calculations, and illumination with 525 nm light allow for precise estimation of the location of the cortical surface.Open in a separate windowFigure 4The robotic electrode inserter; enlarged view of the inserter-head shown in the inset. (A) Loaded needle pincher cartridge. (B) Low-force contact brain position sensor. (C) Light modules with multiple independent wavelengths. (D) Needle motor. (E) One of four cameras focused on the needle during insertion. (F) Camera with wide angle view of the surgical field. (G) Stereoscopic cameras.The robot registers insertion sites to a common coordinate frame with landmarks on the skull, which, when combined with depth tracking, enables precise targeting of anatomically defined brain structures. An integrated custom software suite allows preselection of all insertion sites, enabling planning of insertion paths optimized to minimize tangling and strain on the threads. The planning feature highlights the ability to avoid vasculature during insertions, one of the key advantages of inserting electrodes individually. This is particularly important, since damage to the blood-brain barrier is thought to play a key role in the brain’s inflammatory response to foreign objects [33].The robot features an autoinsertion mode, which can insert up to six threads (192 electrodes) per minute. Although the entire insertion procedure can be automated, the surgeon retains full control, and, if desired, can make manual microadjustments to the thread position before each insertion into the cortex. The neurosurgical robot is compatible with sterile shrouding and has features to facilitate successful and rapid insertions such as automatic sterile ultrasonic cleaning of the needle. The needle pincher cartridge (Figure 2C) is the portion of the inserter head that makes direct contact with brain tissue and is a consumable that can be replaced midsurgery in under a minute.With this system, we have demonstrated an average of 87.1% (SD 12.6%) insertion success rate over 19 surgeries. In this study, precise manual adjustments were made to avoid microvasculature on the cortical surface, slowing total insertion time from the fastest possible time. Even with these adjustments, the total insertion time for this study averaged approximately 45 min for an approximate insertion rate of 29.6 electrodes per minute (Figure 5). Insertions were made in a 4×7 mm2 bilateral craniotomy with >300 µm spacing between threads to maximize cortical coverage. This demonstrates that robotic insertion of thin polymer electrodes is an efficient and scalable approach for recording from large numbers of neurons in anatomically defined brain regions.Open in a separate windowFigure 5A packaged sensor device. (A) Individual neural processing application-specific integrated circuit capable of processing 256 channels of data. This particular packaged device contains 12 of these chips for a total of 3072 channels. (B) Polymer threads on parylene-c substrate. (C) Titanium enclosure (lid removed). (D) Digital USB-C connector for power and data.
Electronics|Chronic recording from thousands of electrode sites presents significant electronics and packaging challenges. The density of recording channels necessitates placing the signal amplification and digitization stack within the array assembly; otherwise, the cable and connector requirements would be prohibitive. This recording stack must amplify small neural signals (<10 µVRMS) while rejecting out-of-band noise, sample and digitize the amplified signals, and stream out the results for real-time processing—all using minimal power and size.The electronics are built around our custom Neuralink application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC), which consists of 256 individually programmable amplifiers (“analog pixels”), on-chip analog-to-digital converters (ADCs), and peripheral control circuitry for serializing the digitized outputs. The analog pixel is highly configurable: The gains and filter properties can be calibrated to account for variability in signal quality due to process variations and the electrophysiological environment. The on-chip ADC samples at 19.3 kHz with 10-bit resolution. Each analog pixel consumes 5.2 µW, and the whole ASIC consumes approximately 6 mW, including the clock drivers. Performance of the Neuralink ASIC is summarized in Table 1, and a photograph of the fabricated device is shown in Figure 6A.Table 1Neuralink application-specific integrated circuit.VariableValueNumber of channels256Gain, dB42.9-59.4Bandwidth, kHz3-27Input-referred noise (3 Hz-10 kHz), µVRMS5.9Maximum differential input range, mVPP7.2Analog-to-digital converter resolution, bit10Analog pixel power, µW5.2Open in a separate windowOpen in a separate windowFigure 6Thread implantation and packaging. (A) An example perioperative image showing the cortical surface with implanted threads and minimal bleeding. (B) Packaged sensor device (“System B”) chronically implanted in a rat.The Neuralink ASIC forms the core of a modular recording platform that allows for easy replacement of constitutive parts for research and development purposes (Figure 6). In the systems discussed here, a number of ASICs are integrated into a standard PCB using flip-chip integration. Each system consists of a field-programmable gate array; real-time temperature, accelerometer, and magnetometer sensors; and a single USB-C connector for full-bandwidth data transfer. The systems are packaged in titanium cases that are coated with parylene-c, which serves as a moisture barrier to prevent fluid ingress and prolong functional lifetime.We describe two such configurations that we have built—a 1536-channel recording system (“System A”) and a 3072-channel recording system (“System B”)—summarized in Table 2. System A employs the current-generation Neuralink ASIC, while System B uses an earlier revision with comparable functionality but poorer performance specifications.Table 2Two recording system configurations.VariableValueSystem ASystem BNumber of channels15363072Sampling rate, kHz19.318.6Total system power consumption, mW550750Total system size, mm324.5×20×1.6523×18.5×2Implant weight, g1115Open in a separate windowSystem B was designed to maximize channel density and is used for applications that demand extremely high channel count. In contrast, System A was designed to facilitate faster and more reliable manufacturing; it can be built five times faster than System B with better yields.An Ethernet-connected base station converts the data streams from these systems into multicast 10 GB Ethernet user datagram protocol packets, allowing downstream users to process the data in a variety of ways, for example, visualizing the data in real time [34] or writing the data to disk. Each base station can connect to up to three implants simultaneously. These devices are further supported by a software ecosystem that allows for plug and play usability with zero configuration: Neural data begin streaming automatically when a cable is connected.
Electrophysiology|We have implanted both Systems A and B in male Long-Evans rats, as described in the section Robot. All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the National Research Council’s Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Neuralink Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Electrophysiological recordings were taken as the animals freely explored an arena equipped with a commutated cable that permitted unrestricted movement. System A can record 1344 of 1536 channels simultaneously; the exact channel configuration can be arbitrarily specified at the time of recording; System B can record from all 3072 channels simultaneously. Digitized broadband signals were processed in real time to identify action potentials (spikes) using an online detection algorithm.Spike detection requirements for real-time brain-machine interface are different from most conventional neurophysiology requirements. While most electrophysiologists spike-sort data offline and spend significant effort to reject false-positive spike events, brain-machine interface events must be detected in real time and spike detection parameters must maximize decoding efficacy. Using our custom online spike-detection software, we found that a permissive filter that allows an estimated false-positive rate of approximately 0.2 Hz performs better than setting stringent thresholds that may reject real spikes (data not shown).Given these considerations, we set a threshold of >0.35 Hz to quantify the number of electrodes that recorded spiking units. Since we typically do not spike sort our data, we do not report multiple units per channel. Brain-machine interface decoders commonly operate without spike sorting with minimal loss of performance [35,36]. Moreover, recent results show that spike sorting is not necessary to accurately estimate neural population dynamics [37].Data from a recent experiment using System A are shown in Figures 7 and ​and8.8. In this experiment, 40 of 44 attempted insertions were successful (90%) for a total of 1280 implanted electrodes, of which 1020 were recorded simultaneously. The broadband signals recorded from a representative thread show both local field and spiking activity (Figure 7). A sample output of the spike detection pipeline is shown in raster form in Figure 8. In this example, two overlapping recording configurations were used to record from all 1280 implanted channels. On this array, our spiking yield was 43.4% of the channels, with many spikes appearing on multiple neighboring channels, as has been observed in other high-density probes [16,17,21]. On other System A arrays, we observed a spiking yield of 45.60% (SD 0.03%) across 19 surgeries, with a maximum spiking yield of 70%.Open in a separate windowFigure 7The broadband signals recorded from a representative thread. Left: Broadband neural signals (unfiltered) simultaneously acquired from a single thread (32 channels) implanted in rat cerebral cortex. Each channel (row) corresponds to an electrode site on the thread (schematic at left; sites spaced by 50 μm). Spikes and local field potentials are readily apparent. Right: Putative waveforms (unsorted); numbers indicate channel location on thread. Mean waveform is shown in black.Open in a separate windowFigure 8Our devices allow the recording of widespread neural activity distributed across multiple brain regions and cortical layers. Left: Thread insertion sites (colored circles) are indicated on the rendered rodent brain [38]. Right: Raster of 1020 simultaneously recorded channels, sorted per thread (color corresponds to insertion site). Inset: Enlarged raster of spikes from a single thread. This thread corresponds to the one shown in Figure 7.
Discussion|We have described a brain-machine interface with a high-channel count and single-spike resolution. It is based on flexible polymer probes, a robotic insertion system, and custom low-power electronics. This system serves two main purposes: It is a research platform for use in rodents and serves as a prototype for future human clinical implants. The ability to quickly iterate designs and testing in rodents allows for the rapid refinement of devices, manufacturing processes, and software. Because it is a research platform, the system uses a wired connection to maximize the bandwidth for raw data streaming. This is important for performance assessments and crucial for the development of signal processing and decoding algorithms. In contrast, the clinical devices that derive from this platform will be fully implantable, which requires hermetic packaging, and have on-board signal compression, reduced power consumption, wireless power transmission, and data telemetry through the skin without percutaneous leads.Modulating neural activity will be an important part of next-generation clinical brain-machine interfaces [39], for example, to provide a sense of touch or proprioception to neuroprosthetic movement control [40,41]. Therefore, we designed the Neuralink ASIC to be capable of electrical stimulation on every channel, although we have not demonstrated these capabilities here.This brain-machine interface system has several advantages over previous approaches. The size and composition of the thin-film probes are a better match for the material properties of brain tissue than commonly used silicon probes and may therefore exhibit enhanced biocompatibility [28,21]. In addition, the ability to choose where our probes are inserted, including into the subcortical structures, allows us to create custom array geometries for targeting specific brain regions while avoiding vasculature. This feature is significant for creating a high-performance brain-machine interface, as the distribution of electrodes can be customized depending on the task requirements. Lastly, the miniaturization and design of the Neuralink ASIC affords great flexibility in system design and supports very high channel counts within practical size and power constraints.In principle, our approach to brain-machine interfaces is highly extensible and scalable. Here, we report simultaneous broadband recording from over 3000 inserted electrodes in a freely moving rat. In a larger brain, multiple devices with this architecture could be readily implanted, and we could therefore interface with many more neurons without extensive re-engineering. Further development of surgical robotics could allow us to accomplish this without dramatically increasing surgery time.Although significant technological challenges must be addressed before a high-bandwidth device is suitable for clinical application, with such a device, it is plausible to imagine that a patient with spinal cord injury could dexterously control a digital mouse and keyboard. When combined with rapidly improving spinal stimulation techniques [42], in the future, this approach could conceivably restore motor function. High-bandwidth neural interfaces should enable a variety of novel therapeutic possibilities.
Acknowledgments|We would like to acknowledge the contributions of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), Berkeley Marvell Nanofabrication Laboratory, Berkeley Wireless Research Center (BWRC), Stanford Nanofabrication Facility, and former and current Neuralink employees in the work described here. Thread manufacturing and high-density package assembly were performed in collaboration with LLNL (CRADA No. TC02267).
Abbreviations|ADCanalog-to-digital convertersASICapplication-specific integrated circuitIrOxiridium oxidePCBprinted circuit boardPEDOT:PSSpoly-ethylenedioxythiophene doped with polystyrene sulfonate
Appendix|Multimedia Appendix 1Video 1: A series of six insertions by the neurosurgical robot into an agarose brain proxy. Thread-capture by the needle occurs off-frame. The changes in background color are caused by illumination with different frequencies of light at different stages of the threading and insertion process. One thread was inserted before the start of the video.Click here to view.(17M, mp4)Multimedia Appendix 2Video 2: A 3D rendered view of thread arrangement (same data presented in Figure 8). Thread insertion is visualized in the same order as in the actual surgery, but time has been compressed for presentation. Thread size and insertion depth are representative. The stereotaxic coordinates of each insertion are represented on the dataset provided by Calabrese and coworkers [35].Click here to view.(1.5M, mp4)
Footnotes|Conflicts of Interest: Authors are affiliated with Neuralink.
Abstract|Background and aimsCOVID-19 and low levels of vitamin D appear to disproportionately affect black and minority ethnic individuals. We aimed to establish whether blood 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) concentration was associated with COVID-19 risk, and whether it explained the higher incidence of COVID-19 in black and South Asian people.MethodsUK Biobank recruited 502,624 participants aged 37–73 years between 2006 and 2010. Baseline exposure data, including 25(OH)D concentration and ethnicity, were linked to COVID-19 test results. Univariable and multivariable logistic regression analyses were performed for the association between 25(OH)D and confirmed COVID-19, and the association between ethnicity and both 25(OH)D and COVID-19.ResultsComplete data were available for 348,598 UK Biobank participants. Of these, 449 had confirmed COVID-19 infection. Vitamin D was associated with COVID-19 infection univariably (OR = 0.99; 95% CI 0.99–0.999; p = 0.013), but not after adjustment for confounders (OR = 1.00; 95% CI = 0.998–1.01; p = 0.208). Ethnicity was associated with COVID-19 infection univariably (blacks versus whites OR = 5.32, 95% CI = 3.68–7.70, p-value<0.001; South Asians versus whites OR = 2.65, 95% CI = 1.65–4.25, p-value<0.001). Adjustment for 25(OH)D concentration made little difference to the magnitude of the association.ConclusionsOur findings do not support a potential link between vitamin D concentrations and risk of COVID-19 infection, nor that vitamin D concentration may explain ethnic differences in COVID-19 infection.Keywords: COVID-19, Vitamin D, Ethnicity
1. Introduction|A novel coronavirus that manifested in 2019 (SARS-CoV-2) has led to a pandemic of pneumonia-related illness (COVID-19) with an estimated case fatality of around 1%. There is an urgent need to better understand risk factors for contracting the infection and for poorer prognosis thereafter.There is growing evidence that COVID-19 disproportionately affects black and minority ethnic individuals, with the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre reporting that a third of confirmed cases admitted to critical care in England are non-white [1]. This compares with the 2011 Census figures which show that 14% of the general population of England and Wales identify themselves as black and minority ethnic individuals [2]. Similarly, in the United States a pattern of higher risk has been observed in African Americans [3]. Consequently, the relationship between ethnicity and COVID-19 has been identified as an urgent public health research priority [4].Several factors have been proposed to explain the apparent greater risk of COVID-19 infection in ethnic minority groups. UK Government statistics show that people from black and minority ethnic backgrounds are more likely than white British people to live in the most socioeconomically deprived areas of England [5]. Furthermore, certain minority ethnic groups experience a higher burden of comorbid disease [6], which may put them at higher risk of more severe COVID-19 infection [7,8].One potential mediator could be the higher prevalence of apparent vitamin D deficiency in black and minority ethnic populations [4]. Vitamin D is variably inversely associated with multiple health outcomes and mortality (although these associations may not be causal) [9]. Most vitamin D results from production in the skin following exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun. Individuals with dark skin have, on average, lower concentrations of blood vitamin D because the melanin in dark skin does not absorb as much UV [10]. Furthermore, deficiency is more common in high latitude countries such as the UK. Whilst most chronic conditions have not been improved by vitamin D supplementation, a recent meta-analysis of randomised trials suggested vitamin D may lessen the risk of acute respiratory infections [11].In this study, we hypothesised that blood 25 hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) concentration was associated with COVID-19 risk among UK Biobank participants, and explained wholly, or in part, the higher incidence of COVID-19 infection in ethnic minority participants.
2. Subjects|UK Biobank recruited 502,624 participants aged 37–73 years across England, Scotland and Wales between 2006 and 2010. Its aim was to identify the causes of disease and death in middle and old age by following up participants over time. At baseline, biological measurements were recorded and touch-screen questionnaires administered according to a standardised protocol [12,13]. The study received ethical approval from the North West Multi-Centre Research Ethics Committee (REC reference: 16/NW/0274), and was conducted in accord with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants gave written informed consent for data collection, analysis, and record linkage.
3. Materials and methods|Baseline data from UK Biobank were linked to COVID-19 test results provided by Public Health England [14], including the specimen date, origin (whether the person was an inpatient or not) and result (positive or negative). Confirmed COVID-19 infection was defined as at least one positive test result. Data were available for the period 16th March 2020 to 14th April 2020.Exposures were measured at the baseline assessment visits conducted between 2006 and 2010. Blood collection sampling procedures for the study have previously been described and validated [15]. Biochemical assays, including 25(OH)D, a measure of vitamin D status, were performed at a central laboratory on around 480,000 samples. Further details of these measurements can be found in the UK Biobank Data Showcase and Protocol [16]. Vitamin D was imputed with the minimum detectable value (10 nmol/L) if it was below the limit of detection, and the maximum detectable value (375 nmol/L) if too high for detection.Ethnicity was self-reported, and categorised as white, black, South Asian, or other.Smoking status was self-reported and categorised as current or non (ex/former) smoker. Blood pressure was measured at the baseline visit using an automated measurement, and the average of available measures used. Height was measured using a Seca 202 height measure. Weight was measured to the nearest 0.1 kg using the Tanita BC-418 MA body composition analyser. Body mass index (BMI) was derived from weight (kg)/height(m) [2]. It was categorised into underweight (BMI<18.5 kg/m2), normal weight (BMI 18.5–24.9 kg/m2), overweight (BMI≥25–29.9 kg/m2) and obese (BMI≥30 kg/m2). Area-level socioeconomic deprivation was assessed by the Townsend score (incorporating measures of unemployment, non-car ownership, non-home ownership and household overcrowding) [17]. Higher scores on the Townsend score represent greater socioeconomic deprivation; scores were categorised into quintiles. Diabetes at baseline was defined as self-reported physician-diagnosed type 1 or type 2 diabetes, a primary care or hospital record of diabetes at or before recruitment (defined as ICD-10 codes E10-E14.9), or diabetes medication. Household income was self-reported and categorised into: <£18,000; £18,000-£30,999; £31,000-£51,999; £52,000-£100,000; or >£100,000. Health was self-rated as excellent, good, fair, or poor. Long-standing illness, disability or infirmity was self-reported as yes or no.Univariable logistic regression analysis was performed of the association between 25(OH)D concentration (as a continuous variable) and confirmed COVID-19 infection. The model was then adjusted for sex, month of assessment, Townsend deprivation quintile, household income, self-reported health rating, smoking status, BMI quintile, ethnicity, age at assessment, diabetes, systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and long-standing illness, disability or infirmity. As sensitivity analyses these models were repeated with participants categorised as vitamin D deficient (defined as <25 nmol/L) or not deficient [18] and then categorised as vitamin D insufficient (defined as <50 nmol/L) or sufficient.Next, univariable logistic regression was performed of the association between ethnicity and confirmed COVID-19 infection. The model was first adjusted for 25(OH)D, then sex, month of assessment, Townsend deprivation quintile, household income, self-reported health rating, smoking status, BMI quintile, age at assessment, diabetes, SBP, DBP, and long-standing illness, disability or infirmity.Finally, multivariable analysis was performed including an ethnicity∗vitamin D deficiency interaction term. All analyses were undertaken using Stata v14.
4. Results|Results were available for 2724 COVID-19 tests conducted on 1474 individuals. Complete data on (25(OH)D) concentration and covariates were available for 348,598 UK Biobank participants. Of these, 449 had a positive COVID-19 test.
Table 1
presents study participants by presence or absence of positive COVID-19 test result. Median 25(OH)D concentration measured at recruitment was lower in patients who subsequently had confirmed COVID-19 infection (28.7 (IQR 10.0–43.8) nmol/L) than other participants (32.7 (IQR 10.0–47.2) nmol/L). It predicted COVID-19 infection univariably (Table 2
; OR = 0.99, 95% CI 0.99–0.999, p = 0.013), but not after adjustment for covariates (OR = 1.00; 95% CI = 0.998–1.01; p = 0.208). Exposures that did predict COVID-19 status in the multivariable logistic regression were male sex (OR = 1.41; 95% CI = 1.16–1.71; p-value = 0.001), higher socioeconomic deprivation (highest vs lowest Townsend quintile OR = 1.89; 95% CI = 1.37–2.60; p-value<0.001), poorer self-reported health status (poor health vs excellent health OR = 2.32; 95% CI = 1.45–3.72; p-value<0.001), age at assessment (OR = 1.02; 95% CI = 1.00–1.03; p-value = 0.016), being overweight (OR = 1.34; 95% CI = 1.04–1.72; p-value = 0.024) or obese (OR = 1.62; 95% CI = 1.23–2.14; p-value = 0.001), and non-white ethnicity (blacks OR = 4.30, 95% CI = 2.92–6.31, p-value<0.001; South Asians OR = 2.42, 95% CI = 1.50–3.93, p-value<0.001) (Fig. 1
).Table 1Characteristics of study population by presence or absence of confirmed COVID-19 infection.No COVID-19COVID-19P valueN (%)N (%)SexMale168,391 (48.37)265 (59.02)<0.001Female179,758 (51.63)184 (40.98)Self-reported ethnicityWhite331,464 (95.21)385 (85.75)<0.001Black5022 (1.44)32 (7.13)South Asian5917 (1.70)19 (4.23)Other5746 (1.65)13 (2.90)Current smoking statusYes312,037 (89.63)398 (88.64)0.493No36,112 (10.37)51 (11.36)Townsend deprivation quintile170,669 (20.30)61 (13.59)<0.001270,726 (20.31)76 (16.93)370,644 (20.29)64 (14.25)470,270 (20.18)105 (23.39)565,840 (18.91)143 (31.85)BMI categoryUnderweight1759 (0.51)2 (0.45)<0.001Normal weight115,410 (33.15)95 (21.16)Overweight148,210 (42.57)194 (43.21)Obese82,770 (23.77)158 (35.19)Self-reported health ratingExcellent60,508 (17.38)45 (10.02)<0.001Good203,640 (58.49)227 (50.56)Fair69,676 (20.01)133 (29.62)Poor14,325 (4.11)44 (9.80)Long-standing illness, disability or infirmityYes237,470 (68.21)245 (54.57)<0.001No110,679 (31.79)204 (45.43)DiabetesYes329,324 (94.59)400 (89.09)<0.001No18,825 (5.41)49 (10.91)Median (IQR)Median (IQR)Vitamin D32.7 (10.0–47.2)28.7 (10.0–43.8)<0.01Age at assessment49 (38–57)49 (40–58)<0.05SBP138 (125–151)138 (127–153)0.177DBP82 (75–89)83 (76–90)<0.01Open in a separate windowCategorical variables compared by chi [2] test; continuous variables compared by Mann-Whitney U test.N number; BMI body mass index; IQR inter-quartile range; SBP systolic blood pressure; DBP diastolic blood pressure.Table 2Association between Vitamin D and confirmed COVID-19 infection.UnivariableMultivariableaOR (95% CI)p-valueOR (95% CI)p-valueVitamin D (nmol/L)0.99 (0.99–0.999)0.0131.00 (0.998–1.01)0.208Vitamin D deficient (<25 nmol/L)1.37 (1.07–1.76)0.0110.92 (0.71–1.21)0.564Vitamin D insufficient (<50 nmol/L)1.19 (0.99–1.44)0.0680.88 (0.72–1.08)0.232Open in a separate windowOR odds ratio; CI confidence interval.aAdjusted for ethnicity, sex, month of assessment, Townsend deprivation quintile, household income, self-reported health rating, smoking status, BMI category, age at assessment, diabetes, SBP, DBP, and long-standing illness, disability or infirmity.Open in a separate windowFig. 1Forest plot of factors associated with COVID-19 infection.When participants were categorised into vitamin D deficient (<25 nmol/L) and not deficient the pattern of results was similar to those observed with vitamin D concentration entered as a continuous variable (univariable OR = 1.37, 95% CI = 1.07–1.76, p-value = 0.011; adjusted OR = 0.92, 95% CI = 0.71–1.21, p-value = 0.564) (Table 2). When participants were categorised into vitamin D insufficient (<50 nmol/L) and sufficient there was no association with COVID-19 infection either univariably (OR = 1.19, 95% CI = 0.99–1.44, p-value = 0.068), nor multivariably (OR = 0.88, 95% CI = 0.72–1.08, p-value = 0.232) (Table 2).In the study, 331,849 (95.20%) participants were white, 5054 (1.45%) black, 5936 (1.70%) South Asian, and 5759 (1.65%) other. Of the 449 participants with confirmed COVID-19 infection, 385 (85.75%) were white, 32 (7.13%) black, 19 (4.23%) South Asian, and 13 (2.90%) other. Median 25(OH)D concentration was 33.8 (IQR 10.0–48.1) nmol/L in white participants, 21.0 (IQR 10.0–29.9) in black participants, 14.5 (IQR 15.5–22.1) in South Asian participants, and 23.3 (IQR 10.0–33.7) nmol/L in others. In this study 38,778 (11.69%) white, 1834 (36.29%) black, 3403 (57.33%) South Asian, and 1671 (29.02%) of other participants were vitamin D deficient at baseline.In logistic regression, black ethnicity and South Asian ethnicity were both associated with confirmed COVID-19 infection univariably (OR = 5.49, 95% CI = 3.82–7.88, p-value<0.001; OR = 2.76, 95% CI = 1.74–4.39, p-value<0.001 respectively) compared with whites. Adjustment for 25(OH)D concentration made little difference to the magnitude of the associations (Table 3
). Results were similar when, instead of adjusting for 25(OH)D concentration, adjustment was made separately for vitamin D deficiency and vitamin D insufficiency.Table 3Association between ethnicity and confirmed COVID-19 infection.UnivariableAdjusted for Vitamin D concentrationMultivariableaOR (95% CI)p-valueOR (95% CI)p-valueOR (95% CI)p-valueWhite (referent)111Black5.49 (3.82–7.88)<0.0015.32 (3.68–7.70)<0.0014.30 (2.92–6.31)<0.001South Asian2.76 (1.74–4.39)<0.0012.65 (1.65–4.25)<0.0012.42 (1.50–3.93)<0.001Other1.95 (1.12–3.39)0.0181.90 (1.09–3.32)0.0241.87 (1.07–3.28)0.029Open in a separate windowOR odds ratio; CI confidence interval.aAlso adjusted for sex, month of assessment, Townsend deprivation quintile, household income, self-reported health rating, smoking status, BMI category, age at assessment, diabetes, SBP, DBP, and long-standing illness, disability or infirmity.There was no significant interaction between ethnicity and vitamin D deficiency (OR = 0.90; 95% CI = 0.66–1.23; p-value = 0.515).
5. Discussion|Our findings are consistent with previous studies [7,19] in demonstrating a higher risk of confirmed COVID-19 infection in ethnic minority groups. Vitamin D has been suggested as possibly protective of COVID-19 infection [[20], [21], [22]] and, if so, could plausibly play a role in ethnic variations in COVID-19 infection. However, we found no association between 25(OH)D and COVID-19 infection after adjusting for potential confounders. Therefore, despite 25(OH)D concentration being lower in black and minority ethnic participants, there was no evidence that it might play a role in their higher risk of COVID-19 infection.It has been suggested in some media outlets that language barriers may contribute to ethnic differences in COVID-19 risk. This is unlikely to contribute to the risk we observed in UK Biobank because all participants spoke English (albeit with the possibility of fluency variation). The association with ethnicity was only slightly attenuated after adjustment for socioeconomic and lifestyle differences in white and black and minority ethnic participants; the risk of COVID-19 remained around 4-fold in black participants and more than 2-fold in South Asians. Further studies are required to determine the mechanisms underlying ethnic variations in risk of COVID-19 infection and its severity. It may be that pathways related to cardiometabolic conditions or differences in cardiorespiratory reserve, or potentially other social factors, are more relevant, as we have recently discussed [23].Our study replicated findings showing increased risk of COVID-19 in black and minority ethnic individuals, in men, and in people who are overweight or obese. It is surprising that we did not observe an association between diabetes or blood pressure and COVID-19 risk. Other studies have shown increased risk of hospitalisation and severe illness requiring ventilation in patients with diabetes and hypertension [7,24]. However, ours is a relatively healthy general population cohort. Furthermore, we do not have information on the severity of COVID-19 and have included all positive tests rather than only severe cases.We did not show an independent association between smoking and COVID-19. Evidence from the literature is mixed. Initial studies suggested that current smoking increases the risk of severe infection [25]. However, this has since been disputed with some evidence that smoking may even protect against initial infection [26].The strengths of UK Biobank include its extensive phenotyping which enables the adjustment for demographic and lifestyle risk factors, disease and ill health, its large sample size, and its central processing laboratory for biochemical assays. However, it is not representative of the general population, in that participants live in less socioeconomically deprived areas, are predominantly Caucasian, and have fewer self-reported health conditions [27]. We have demonstrated that ethnic differences in COVID-19 infection exist in this relatively healthy population. Baseline measurements, including 25(OH)D concentration and health status, were obtained a decade ago. It would be preferable to have measurements immediately preceding development of COVID-19. However, 25(OH)D concentrations vary more by season than year, and generally track over time [28].Our study is the first to assess whether there is an association between blood 25(OH)D concentration and COVID-19 risk. We found no such link, suggesting that measurement of 25(OH)D would not be useful to assess risk in clinical practice. Furthermore, our results suggest that vitamin D is unlikely to be the underlying mechanism for the higher risk observed in black and minority ethnic individuals and vitamin D supplements are unlikely to provide an effective intervention.
6. Conclusion|Our analyses of UK Biobank data provided no evidence to support a potential role for (25 (OH)D) concentration to explain susceptibility to COVID-19 infection either overall or in explaining differences between ethnic groups.
Author contributions|JPP and NS had the original concept. CEH undertook the statistical analyses. All authors interpreted the results. CEH, JPP and NS drafted the manuscript. All authors revised the manuscript and approved the final version.
Declaration of competing interest|The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements|CEH is funded by Health Data Research-UK (Ref. Edin-1).SVK acknowledges funding from a NRS Senior Clinical Fellowship (SCAF/15/02), the Medical Research Council (MC_UU_12017/13) and the Scottish Government Chief Scientist Office (SPHSU13).CLN is supported by the Medical Research Council (MR/R024774/1).NS receives funding from the British Heart Foundation Research Excellence Award (RE/18/6/34217).
Abstract| Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) preferentially infects cells in the respiratory tract,1,2 but its direct affinity for organs other than the lungs remains poorly defined. Here, we present data from an autopsy series of 27 patients (see the clinical data in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this letter at NEJM.org) that show that SARS-CoV-2 can be detected in multiple organs, including the lungs, pharynx, heart, liver, brain, and kidneys.We first quantified the SARS-CoV-2 viral load in autopsy tissue samples obtained from 22 patients who had died from Covid-19. Seventeen patients (77%) had more than two coexisting conditions (Figure 1A), and a greater number of coexisting conditions was associated with SARS-CoV-2 tropism for the kidneys (Table S2), even in patients without a history of chronic kidney disease (Table S3). The highest levels of SARS-CoV-2 copies per cell were detected in the respiratory tract, and lower levels were detected the kidneys, liver, heart, brain, and blood (Figure 1B). These findings indicate a broad organotropism of SARS-CoV-2.Since the kidneys are among the most common targets of SARS-CoV-2, we performed in silico analysis of publicly available data sets of single-cell RNA sequencing. This analysis revealed that RNA for angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2), and cathepsin L (CTSL) — RNA of genes that are considered to facilitate SARS-CoV-2 infection3 — is enriched in multiple kidney-cell types from fetal development through adulthood (Fig. S1). This enrichment may facilitate SARS-CoV-2–associated kidney injury, as previously suggested.4We also quantified the SARS-CoV-2 viral load in precisely defined kidney compartments obtained with the use of tissue microdissection from 6 patients who underwent autopsy (1 patient who was included in the previously mentioned 22 patients as an internal negative control, plus 5 additional patients). Three of these 6 patients had a detectable SARS-CoV-2 viral load in all kidney compartments examined, with preferential targeting of glomerular cells (Fig. S2). We also detected viral RNA and protein with high spatial resolution using in situ hybridization and indirect immunofluorescence with confocal microscopy (Figure 1C). Data on additional controls are provided in Figures S3 and S4.On the basis of these findings, renal tropism is a potential explanation of commonly reported new clinical signs of kidney injury in patients with Covid-19,5 even in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection who are not critically ill. Our results indicate that SARS-CoV-2 has an organotropism beyond the respiratory tract, including the kidneys, liver, heart, and brain, and we speculate that organotropism influences the course of Covid-19 disease and, possibly, aggravates preexisting conditions.Victor G. Puelles, M.D., Ph.D.Marc Lütgehetmann, M.D.Maja T. Lindenmeyer, Ph.D.Jan P. Sperhake, M.D.Milagros N. Wong, M.D.Lena Allweiss, Ph.D.Silvia ChillaAxel Heinemann, M.D.Nicola Wanner, Ph.D.Shuya Liu, Ph.D.Fabian Braun, M.D.Shun Lu, Ph.D.Susanne Pfefferle, M.D.Ann S. Schröder, M.D.Carolin Edler, M.D.University Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf, Hamburg, GermanyOliver Gross, M.D.University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, GermanyMarkus Glatzel, M.D.Dominic Wichmann, M.D.Thorsten Wiech, M.D.Stefan Kluge, M.D.Klaus Pueschel, M.D.Martin Aepfelbacher, M.D.Tobias B. Huber, M.D.University Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany [email protected]This letter was published on May 13, 2020, at NEJM.org.
Abstract|Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by synaptic and neuronal loss, which occurs at least partially through oxidative stress induced by oligomeric amyloid-β (Aβ)-peptide. Carnosic acid (CA), a chemical found in rosemary and sage, is a pro-electrophilic compound that is converted to its active form by oxidative stress. The active form stimulates the Keap1/Nrf2 transcriptional pathway and thus production of phase 2 antioxidant enzymes. We used both in vitro and in vivo models. For in vitro studies, we evaluated protective effects of CA on primary neurons exposed to oligomeric Aβ. For in vivo studies, we used two transgenic mouse models of AD, human amyloid precursor protein (hAPP)-J20 mice and triple transgenic (3xTg AD) mice. We treated these mice trans-nasally with CA twice weekly for 3 months. Subsequently, we performed neurobehavioral tests and quantitative immunohistochemistry to assess effects on AD-related phenotypes, including learning and memory, and synaptic damage. In vitro, CA reduced dendritic spine loss in rat neurons exposed to oligomeric Aβ. In vivo, CA treatment of hAPP-J20 mice improved learning and memory in the Morris water maze test. Histologically, CA increased dendritic and synaptic markers, and decreased astrogliosis, Aβ plaque number, and phospho-tau staining in the hippocampus. We conclude that CA exhibits therapeutic benefits in rodent AD models and since the FDA has placed CA on the ‘generally regarded as safe’ (GRAS) list, thus obviating the need for safety studies, human clinical trials will be greatly expedited.
Main|Alzheimer’s disease (AD) affects 5% of people over age 65 years, and its prevalence is increasing.1 Although AD manifests amyloid plaques and tau tangles, loss of synapses, eventually accompanied by neuronal loss, more closely correlates with cognitive decline.2 Damage to neurons occurs at least partially through generation of oxidative and nitrosative stress, due to excessive generation of reactive oxygen/nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) triggered by oligomeric amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide.3, 4, 5, 6Activation of the Keap1/Nrf2 (kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1/nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2) pathway upregulates transcription of phase 2 antioxidant and anti-inflammatory proteins. We and others have shown that this can be a valuable therapeutic strategy in several neurodegenerative diseases (reviewed in Satoh et al.7). Here, we tested this approach in mouse models of AD using a compound known to activate the Keap1/Nrf2 pathway and to be clinically tolerated because of its presence in herbs widely-used in cooking. A critical factor that suggested the use of Nrf2 activators in this context was the finding that deficits in spatial learning, as seen in amyloid precursor protein (APP) transgenic mice, were ameliorated after intra-hippocampal injection of a lentiviral vector expressing Nrf2.8 Conversely, in humans with AD, decreased expression of Nrf2 in hippocampal neurons and astrocytes has been reported.9 The Keap1/Nrf2 pathway can be activated by an electrophilic compound when it reacts with a specific thiol on Keap1, releasing Nrf2 in the cytoplasm so it can enter the nucleus, where it binds to the antioxidant response element (ARE) on the promoters of phase 2 genes.10 Interestingly, several exogenous electrophilic compounds, including natural products, have been shown to activate this pathway, and thereby provide neuroprotection against ROS/RNS.An important issue, however, with electrophilic drugs is that they non-specifically react with thiol groups, and because glutathione (GSH) is the predominant thiol in normal cells, GSH can be depleted by electrophiles thus paradoxically lowering the threshold for cell toxicity in unstressed cells.11 An alternative strategy is to use pro-electrophilic drugs (PEDs) that are activated by the very oxidation in redox-stressed cells that is injurious and in which GSH has already been depleted.7 Carnosic acid (CA) represents such a PED that is found in the herbs rosemary and sage, which reportedly exhibit antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties.12, 13 Our group elucidated the mechanistic basis for this action, showing that CA is relatively innocuous until activated by ROS at the site of damage. We demonstrated that ROS converts CA to the active electrophilic form, which affords protection in animal models of neural damage7, 14In the present study, we demonstrate the neuroprotective effects of CA both in vitro and in vivo in two transgenic mouse models of AD. Our neurobehavioral and histological readouts suggest that CA, administered trans-nasally in vivo, can be an effective treatment for AD in these rodent models.
Results|CA treatment ameliorates Aβ-induced spine loss in cultured rat cortical neuronsWe first assessed potential therapeutic benefits of CA in primary cortical neurons prepared from rat embryos. After 14–16 days in culture, neuronal cells were transfected with pmax-GFP to visualize dendritic spines. We then exposed the transfected cells to synthetic amyloid-β peptide 1-42 (Aβ42) oligomers (250 nM) in the presence or absence of CA. Four days after exposure, we fixed the neurons and quantified the number of dendritic spines per micrometer of dendritic length. As shown in Figure 1, Aβ exposure significantly reduced dendritic spine density in rat cortical neurons compared to control. In contrast, CA treatment concomitant with the Aβ exposure ameliorated oligomeric Aβ-induced dendritic spine loss.Figure 1Carnosic acid (CA) treatment ameliorates Aβ-induced dendritic spine loss in cultured rat neurons. (a) Images of rat cortical neurons transfected with pmax-GFP and then exposed to synthetic Aβ42 (250 nM oligomers) with or without CA (10 μM) for 4 days. After fixation, dendritic spines were visualized by GFP fluorescence. (b) Quantification of spine density per micrometer of dendritic length. Neurons exposed to oligomeric Aβ manifested significantly reduced dendritic spine density, and treatment with CA ameliorated this loss. Values are mean+S.E.M. (n>20 fields of dendritic spines for each condition; *P<0.05 by ANOVA compared with other conditions). Scale bar, 5 μmFull size imageCA treatment rescues deficits in spatial learning in hAPP-J20 AD miceWe assessed the effects of treatment with CA on spatial learning in hAPP-J20 mice. To this end, both wild-type (WT) and hAPP-J20 mice received transnasal CA administration for 3 months beginning at the age of 3 months. We then evaluated these mice in the Morris water maze. As shown in Figure 2a, after acclimatization and during the hidden platform trials, we found that on all three days (training days 1-3) hAPP-J20 mice without CA treatment spent significantly longer times in reaching the hidden platform than WT mice (treated with either vehicle or CA (WT-Control and WT-CA)). These data indicate that hAPP-J20 mice exhibited substantial deficits in the learning phase of the water maze test. This finding is consistent with previous reports that showed learning deficits in 6-month-old hAPP-J20 mice.15 Importantly, however, although the hAPP-J20 mice that received CA treatment (J20-CA) took a significantly longer time to reach the platform on the first day of training compared to WT, by subsequent training day 3 they took a similar amount of time to reach the platform (Figure 2a). This finding indicates that treatment with CA improves learning in hAPP-J20 mice. We next tested memory function in these mice. However, because we found that only a small number of hAPP-J20 vehicle-treated (control) mice learned the location of the hidden platform during our training protocol (Figure 2a), their memory could not be tested. Therefore, we performed a ‘non-inferiority trial’ to compare the effect of CA on hAPP-J20 mice vs. WT to determine if they were statistically different or not. We tested three groups of mice (WT-Control, WT-CA and J20-CA) in probe trials in which the platform was removed from the pool and the time spent in different quadrants of the pool was recorded during a 60-second-long trial. As shown in Figure 2b, all three groups of mice spent significantly more time in the trained quadrant (bottom left) than in the opposite quadrant (top right). These data are consistent with the notion that these mice remembered the location of the hidden platform following the three days of training. Furthermore, we found that the performance of the J20-CA mice was not significantly different from the WT-Control and WT-CA groups. Collectively, these results indicate that treatment with CA improved hAPP-J20 mice in the learning phase of the Morris water maze test and normalized their performance in the memory phase.Figure 2CA treatment improves spatial learning in hAPP-J20 mice. (a) J20 and WT littermate controls were assessed for learning in the Morris water maze test after treatment with CA or vehicle (Control). Evaluation of time to find the hidden platform during training in the four groups of mice indicates that CA treatment improved spatial learning in J20 mice (n⩾6 mice/group; **P<0.03 by two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). (b) Following training, a probe test, in which the hidden platform was removed, was performed to assess spatial memory. Mice were scored for the time spent in the bottom left quadrant (prior location of the platform) versus the top right quadrant (n⩾5 mice/group; **P<0.01 by Student’s t-test). The performance of J20-CA mice is not significantly different from those of WT-Control and WT-CA mice by two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Dashed line indicates time spent in a quadrant by chance alone (15 s)Full size imageCA Treatment rescues dendritic loss in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by the number of MAP2-positive cellsWe next evaluated the effects of CA treatment on the dendritic/neuronal loss that occurs in hAPP-J20 mice.16 For this experiment, WT and hAPP-J20 mice received either vehicle or CA trans-nasally for 3 months starting at 3 months of age. We then prepared hippocampal sections from the four groups of mice (WT-Control, WT-CA, J20-Control and J20-CA) and performed quantitative confocal immunohistochemistry using MAP2 monoclonal antibody. WT-Control and WT-CA brains showed robust MAP2 signal in the hippocampus, while J20-Control exhibited a decrement in MAP2 signal (Figure 3a, top). When quantified by measuring percent (%) area of MAP2-positive neuropil (Figure 3a, bottom), J20-Control hippocampus exhibited a significant decrease in MAP2 signal. Remarkably, J20-CA hippocampus showed significantly greater MAP2 signal than that of J20-Control and similar to that of WT-Control and WT-CA. These results indicate that CA treatment can rescue the dendritic loss that occurs in hAPP-J20 mice.Figure 3CA treatment reverses deficits in neuropil and synaptic density in hAPP-J20 mice. Quantitative immunohistochemistry of hippocampal sections prepared from wild-type (WT) and J20 mice treated with CA or vehicle (Control). (a) Immunohistochemistry with MAP2 antibody. CA treatment restored MAP2 staining/neuropil density to normal levels in the hippocampus of hAPP-J20 mice. (b) Immunohistochemistry with synaptophysin antibody. CA treatment restored synaptophysin staining/synapse density to normal levels in both cortex and hippocampus of hAPP-J20 mice (n=4–10 mice/group; **P<0.01 by ANOVA). Scale bar, 250 μmFull size imageCA Treatment rescues synaptic loss in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by synaptophysin stainingWe also examined the effects of CA treatment on the synaptic loss that occurs in the hAPP-J20 mouse model of AD.17 Quantitative confocal immunohistochemistry, expressed as percent (%) area decorated by synaptophysin antibody, revealed a significant reduction in synaptophysin signal in the J20-Control hippocampus compared to WT (Figure 3b). In contrast, the synaptophysin immunosignal was normal in J20-CA hippocampi, indicating that CA treatment rescues synaptic loss in the hAPP-J20 hippocampus.CA Treatment decreases astrocytosis in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by the number of GFAP-positive cellsWe next examined the effects of CA treatment on the gliosis that occurs in hAPP-J20 mice.17 Immunohistochemistry using GFAP monoclonal antibody revealed a significant increase in GFAP signal in J20-Control but not in J20-CA hippocampus (Figure 4a). This finding indicates that treatment with CA can prevent gliosis in the hippocampus of hAPP-J20 mice.Figure 4CA treatment prevents reactive astrocytosis and blocks accumulation of Aβ protein aggregates in hAPP-J20 mice. Quantitative immunohistochemistry of hippocampal sections from wild-type (WT) and J20 mice treated with CA or vehicle (Control). (a) Immunohistochemistry with GFAP antibody. CA treatment decreased GFAP staining/astrocytosis in the hippocampus of hAPP-J20 mice. (b) Immunohistochemistry with Aβ antibody. Aβ protein aggregates were significantly decreased after treatment with CA (n=4–10 mice/group; **P<0.01 by ANOVA). Scale bar, 250 μmFull size imageCA Treatment reduces amyloid accumulation in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by Aβ immunohistochemistryPrevious work had shown that CA could suppress production of Aβ in vitro,18 but heretofore this has not been demonstrated in intact brain. hAPP-J20 mice express high levels of Aβ peptide in multiple brain areas, including cortex and hippocampus.17 Therefore, we examined the effects of treatment with CA on Aβ levels in hAPP-J20 mouse brain. Quantitative confocal immunohistochemistry was performed using anti-human Aβ 4G8 antibody (recognizing amino-acid residues 17-24 of the Aβ peptide). WT-Control treated and WT-CA treated hippocampus showed undetectable levels of Aβ. In contrast, J20-Control treated hippocampus showed high levels of Aβ signal. Remarkably, levels of Aβ were significantly reduced in J20-CA treated brain sections (Figure 4b), indicating that CA treatment suppressed Aβ levels in hAPP-J20 mice in vivo.Effects of CA treatment on 3xTg AD mouse brainNext, we assessed the effects of CA treatment in a second AD mouse model in order to test for generalization of our findings. Since these mice develop neuropathological phenotypes more slowly than hAPP-J20 mice, we started CA treatment at age 6 months of age, trans-nasally administering CA or vehicle for the next 3 months. At 9 months of age, mice were killed, and hippocampal sections prepared for immunohistochemical analysis by quantitative confocal microscopy. As shown in Figure 5, CA treatment of 3xTg mice resulted in (1) increased MAP2 signal, (2) decreased GFAP signal and (3) increased synaptophysin labeling. In addition, 3xTg mice have been reported to manifest increased amounts of p-tau.19 We found that CA treatment reduced the levels of p-tau signal in 3xTg mouse brain. Taken together, these data support the notion that CA treatment rescues or ameliorates pathophysiological phenotypes of AD in two separate mouse models of the disease.Figure 5CA treatment improves AD brain markers in 3xTg AD mice. Quantitative immunohistochemistry of hippocampal sections from 3xTg AD mice treated with CA or vehicle (Control). After CA treatment, 3xTg AD hippocampus displayed increased MAP2/neuropil and synaptophysin/synaptic densities, and reduced GFAP/astrocytosis and p-tau (n=8–9 mice/group; *P<0.05, **P<0.01 by t-test). Scale bar, 40 μmFull size image
Discussion|We have previously shown that pro-electrophilic drugs (PEDs) that activate the Keap1/Nrf2 transcriptional pathway can increase the levels of phase 2 antioxidant and anti-inflammatory enzymes in neural tissue to afford neuroprotection (Figure 6).7, 14 PEDs display an advantage over conventional electrophilic compounds that activate the Nrf2 pathway, including dimethylfumarate, in that they do not deplete glutathione from normal cells in the body; therefore, PEDs are expected to be better tolerated clinically than electrophilic drugs.7 Moreover, we and others have previously shown that CA crosses the blood-brain barrier and is detectable at neuroprotective concentrations in various CNS tissues when it is administered via various routes (intraperitoneal, oral and transnasal).20, 21, 22 Importantly, we have previously demonstrated ‘target engagement’ of CA via its reaction with a critical cysteine residue in Keap1 to activate Nrf2 in our models. We showed activation of the Nrf2 pathway via reporter gene assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChiP), electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and RNA and immunoblot readouts of phase 2 enzymes (reviewed in Satoh et al.7).Figure 6Schematic model showing action of a pro-electrophilic drugs (PEDs) in activating the Nrf2 transcriptional pathway. In this case the PED Carnosic Acid (CA) is activated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) to the active quinone form. This activated form of the drug reacts with a critical thiol (-SH) group on the cytoplasmic protein Keap1, which releases the transcription factor Nrf2. Nrf2 then is free to enter the nucleus where it transcriptionally activates a series of endogenous, neuroprotective antioxidant and anti-inflammatory proteins known as phase 2 enzymesFull size imageWhile electrophilic compounds, including kavalactone, decursin, sulforaphane, oleanolic acid, CDDO-methylamide and curcumin, have been shown to attenuate Aβ toxicity in cell-based or animal models,23, 24 PEDs have not previously been tested in vivo in transgenic models of AD. Accordingly, in the present study, we sought to test the effects of the PED, CA, in two different transgenic mouse models of AD. Specifically, we show that CA treatment of hAPP-J20 mice for three months ameliorates impairment in learning on the Morris water maze test. We also demonstrate that CA rescues or ameliorates histological damage in the hippocampus of both the hAPP-J20 and 3xTg AD mouse models. We found that treatment with CA decreased (i) dendritic loss, assessed by MAP2 staining, (ii) synaptic loss, assessed by synaptophysin staining, (iii) gliosis, assessed by GFAP staining and (iv) deposition of Aβ peptide. In addition, in the 3xTg model in which mutant tau is expressed, CA prevented accumulation of p-tau. Collectively, these data show that treatment with CA rescues various AD-related phenotypes in hAPP-J20 and 3xTg mice.Concerning the mechanism of these protective effects, our group previously showed that oxidative stress converts CA into an active electrophile that reacts with Keap1 at a critical cysteine residue. This results in less ubiquitination and degradation of Nrf2, leaving free Nrf2 to enter the nucleus to activate expression of endogenous phase 2 genes.7 These genes encode antioxidant enzymes, including heme oxygenase I (HO-1), γ-glutamyl cysteine synthetase (γ-GCS), NAD(P)H:quinone oxido-reductase (NQO-1) and sulfiredoxin (SRXN1).10 In AD, aberrant production of ROS and RNS are thought to interfere with normal cellular processes and thus contribute to the pathogenesis of neurodegeneration.25 Thus, it is likely that the neuroprotective effect of CA in vivo in AD transgenic mice occurs, at least in part, by activation of the Keap1/Nrf2 pathway and hence induction of antioxidant phase 2 enzymes.Moreover, CA may exert other actions in neurons via activation of Nrf2 in addition to induction of antioxidant enzymes. For example, CA was recently reported to suppress Aβ42 production and oligomerization in the SH-SY5Y neural cell line.18 The authors attributed this suppression of Aβ production to transcriptional upregulation of α-secretase (but not β-secretase) by CA. α-Secretase induces alternate cleavage of APP, avoiding generation of Aβ42. The upregulation of α-secretase transcription is potentially mediated by Nrf2 activation, but CA has been shown to activate other transcriptional pathways as well.7 In addition, activation of Nrf2 has been shown to decrease the level of phospho-tau protein,26 which is thought to mediate neuronal damage in AD downstream of aberrant Aβ activity.27In summary, based on these findings in vitro and in two AD transgenic mice in vivo, our study shows that CA represents a promising small molecule therapeutic that may be useful in AD. Furthermore, CA is found in the herbs rosemary and sage, and hence because of its long safety record is registered on the FDA’s ‘generally regarded as safe’ (GRAS) list. Hence, its excellent safety profile should expedite human clinical trials with this compound not only for AD, but also for other neurodegenerative diseases where oxidative stress is thought to contribute to pathogenesis.
Materials and methods|Aβ peptide preparationsSynthetic Aβ42 was suspended to an initial concentration of 1 mM in hexafluoro-isopropanol, incubated for 2 h at room temperature, and solvent was evaporated in a SpeedVac. Peptide was resuspended in DMSO to a final stock concentration of 5 mM and was kept frozen at −80 °C until use. For oligomerization, the stock solution was diluted 10-fold in MEM (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and was then incubated at 4 °C for ⩾24 h. Oligomerized Aβ peptide preparations were sonicated immediately before use. The total concentration of Aβ42 was monitored by ELISA after centrifugation at 11 000 × g for 2 min. Western blot and light-scattering analyses of the preparations were performed before and after centrifugation to verify their oligomeric status. By dynamic light scattering, the Aβ42 preparation used here contained 250 nM of oligomers. Previously, we had reported in our preparations that nanomolar concentrations of synthetic Aβ42 oligomers or picomolar concentrations of natural Aβ42 oligomers prepared from human AD brain produced similar effects.28Quantification of dendritic spine density in cultured rat primary neuronsPrimary cortical cultures, containing cerebrocortical neurons, some hippocampal neurons and glia, were prepared from embryonic day 16 rat pups. The cultures were transfected at 14–16 days in vitro with pmax-green fluorescence protein (GFP) for subsequent visualization of synaptic dendritic spines and incubated in 10 μM CA or vehicle. The next day, neurons were exposed to Aβ oligomers with CA or vehicle for 4 d. Cultures were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min. Images of GFP-expressing cells were acquired by deconvolution microscopy equipped with SlideBook 5.5 software (Intelligent Imaging Innovations, Inc., Denver, CO, USA). For GFP-expressing neurons, four distinct fields of secondary or tertiary dendrites were randomly selected and dendritic spine protuberances were counted in a masked fashion.AD Transgenic miceAll animal procedures were approved by the IACUC at Sanford-Burnham-Prebys Medical Discovery Institute. hAPP-J20 mice express a transgene encoding pathogenic human APP (with Swedish and Indiana mutations), producing a high-level of Aβ42 peptide.15, 17 3xTg mice express transgenes encoding three familial mutations of AD in APP, presenilin 1 and tau, namely APP Swedish, MAPT P301L and PSEN1 M146V.19 Homozygous 3xTg AD breeders were obtained from Dr. Frank LaFerla (UC Irvine) and age-matched C57B6 control mice from Jackson Labs. Heterozygous B6.Cg-Tg(PDGFB-APPSwInd)20Lms/2 J (hAPP-J20) breeders were obtained from Dr. Lennart Mucke (Gladstone Institute/UCSF).17 Genotyping was performed by PCR.CA treatmentTo minimize systemic delivery and maximize CNS levels, CA was administered trans-nasally (10 mg/kg b.w.), as previously described.7, 21 We administered drug twice weekly for 3 months, commencing at age 6 months for 3xTg AD mice and age 3 months for hAPP-J20 mice (since they become symptomatic earlier). CA was dissolved in a small volume of DMSO as a stock solution, then diluted ~1000 × in a mixture of hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (HP-β-CD) and chitosan. Chitosan was used as a ‘barrier-modulating agent,’ as it is known to enhance drug delivery by safe and temporary permeabilization of olfactory mucosa. As a control, we administered vehicle alone (HP-β-CD and chitosan). During drug delivery, animals were anesthetized with isoflurane using a nose cone. Mice were placed in a supine position and 12 μl drug solution were administered by pipette in 2 μl drops, alternating between each nare. During drug administration, mice were briefly (~5 s) removed from the nose cone. Mice were then returned to the nose cone for one minute before repeating the procedure.Morris water maze neurobehavioral testingThe maze consisted of a circular pool filled with opaque water (21±1 °C). Distinct cues were placed around the interior of the pool above the water line. On day 0, mice were given four acclimatization trials in which they had to swim in the circular tank with a submerged platform made visible by a bright red conical beacon. Mice that did not mount the platform were guided to it gently and allowed to sit on it for 10 s before being removed by the experimenter. The maximum time allowed per trial in this task was 60 s. We placed the visible platform at the same location where the hidden platform would be later placed during the hidden platform training. We found that this protocol accelerates the learning of the platform location in WT mice. For hidden platform experiments, mice underwent training trials in which each mouse was given a maximum of sixty seconds to find the platform. If after 60 s the mouse had not located the platform, it was guided to the platform and allowed to stay on it for 10 s before being removed. The animal’s movements with respect to the platform’s location were recorded by an automated tracking system and analyzed.Brain immunohistochemistryBrains were fixed in freshly prepared 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and cut into 40 μm-thick vibratome sections. Immunolabeling was performed using mouse monoclonal antibodies against neuronal-specific proteins: microtubule associated protein 2 (MAP2, 1:100; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), glial fibrillary associated protein (GFAP, 1:1000; Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA), phospho-tau (p-tau, catalog #AT8, 1:500; Pierce, Waltham, MA, USA; catalog #AT270, 1:500; Pierce) and synaptophysin (1:500; Millipore). After overnight incubation with the primary antibodies, sections were incubated with Texas red or FITC-conjugated horse anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (1:75; Vector Laboratories, Burlinggame, CA, USA), transferred to SuperFrost slides (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and mounted under glass coverslips with anti-fading media (Vector). For Aβ quantification, tissues were pretreated with 90% formic acid for 1 min, rinsed and incubated in 0.6% hydrogen peroxidase in tris-buffered saline (TBS) with 5% goat serum and 0.25% Triton X-100 to block nonspecific labeling. Sections were then washed and incubated in anti-human Aβ 4G8 antibody (1:1000; Signet, Dedham, MA, USA) overnight, followed by sequential treatment with biotinylated goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA), avidin-biotin solution (ABC Elite; Vector Laboratory) and nickel-enhanced diaminobenzidine. Signals were analyzed by quantitative confocal immunofluorescence using blind-coded sections, serially imaged on a laser-scanning confocal microscope and quantified using NIH Image 1.43 software. A total of three sections for each brain and four fields for each section were analyzed in each brain area.Statistical assessmentPairwise comparisons were made using a two-tailed Student’s t-test. For multiple comparisons, an ANOVA was performed followed by an appropriate post-hoc test. A P-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Acknowledgements|This work was supported in part by NIH grants R21 NS080799, P01 HD029587, and the La Jolla Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Center Core Grant P30 NS076411 and by a Distinguished Investigator Award from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation (to SAL). WE appreciate the contributions of Sara Sanz-Blasco, Zaneta Cha, Brian Lee and Marcos Valencia.
Author contributions
SAL, TS, TR and NN designed the research; AN, KML, TR, JP, SRM and EM performed the research; KK contributed unpublished reagents/analytic tools; SAL, AN, JP, EM and NN analyzed the data; SAL and NN wrote the paper. TR, AN, KL and SRM performed the experiments; EM did the histology and microscopy, generated data and images; JP and SRM did the statistics and prepared the figure; TS prepared the figure.
Author information|Author notesTayebeh RezaiePresent address: 5Present address: National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA, 
                  Takumi SatohPresent address: 7Present address: Department of Anti-Aging Food Research, School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo University of Technology, Tokyo 192-0982, Japan, 
                  Tayebeh Rezaie and Anthony Nutter: These contributed equally to this work.AffiliationsNeurodegenerative Disease Center, Scintillon Institute, San Diego, 92121, CA, USAStuart A Lipton, Kevin M Lopez, James Parker, Scott R McKercher & Nobuki NakanishiDepartment of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, 92093, CA, USAStuart A Lipton & Eliezer MasliahNeuroscience and Aging Research Center, Sanford-Burnham-Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USAStuart A Lipton, Tayebeh Rezaie, Anthony Nutter, Kevin M Lopez, James Parker, Takumi Satoh, Scott R McKercher & Nobuki NakanishiResearch and Development Center, Nagase CO., LTD., Kobe, 651-2241, Hyogo, JapanKunio KosakaAuthorsStuart A LiptonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarTayebeh RezaieView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAnthony NutterView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKevin M LopezView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJames ParkerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKunio KosakaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarTakumi SatohView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarScott R McKercherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarEliezer MasliahView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarNobuki NakanishiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarCorresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Stuart A Lipton or Nobuki Nakanishi.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Additional information|Edited by A Verkhratsky
Rights and permissions|
Cell Death and Disease  is an open-access journal published by Nature Publishing Group. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleLipton, S., Rezaie, T., Nutter, A. et al. Therapeutic advantage of pro-electrophilic drugs to activate the Nrf2/ARE pathway in Alzheimer’s disease models.
                    Cell Death Dis 7, e2499 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/cddis.2016.389Download citationReceived: 15 August 2016Accepted: 20 October 2016Published: 01 December 2016Issue Date: December 2016DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/cddis.2016.389
Further reading|g





                  Role of Kalirin and Mouse Strain in Retention of Spatial Memory Training in an Alzheimer’s Disease Model Mouse Line
                


Lillian Russo-Savage, Vishwanatha K.S. Rao, Betty A. Eipper & Richard E. Mains

Neurobiology of Aging
                (2020)
              




                  Neuroprotective Effects of Euonymus alatus Extract on Scopolamine-Induced Memory Deficits in Mice
                


Yunju Woo, Ji Sun Lim, Jisun Oh, Jeong Soon Lee & Jong-Sang Kim

Antioxidants
                (2020)
              




                  The role of natural products in revealing NRF2 function
                


Donna D. Zhang & Eli Chapman

Natural Product Reports
                (2020)
              




                  Terpenoids as Potential Geroprotectors
                


Ekaterina Proshkina, Sergey Plyusnin, Tatyana Babak, Ekaterina Lashmanova, Faniya Maganova, Liubov Koval, Elena Platonova, Mikhail Shaposhnikov & Alexey Moskalev

Antioxidants
                (2020)
              




                  Exploration of multi‐target effects of 3‐benzoyl‐5‐hydroxychromen‐2‐one in Alzheimer’s disease cell and mouse models
                


Te‐Hsien Lin, Ya‐Jen Chiu, Chih‐Hsin Lin, Chung‐Yin Lin, Chih‐Ying Chao, Yu‐Chieh Chen, Shu‐Mei Yang, Wenwei Lin, Hsiu Mei Hsieh‐Li, Yih‐Ru Wu, Kuo‐Hsuan Chang, Guey‐Jen Lee‐Chen & Chiung‐Mei Chen

Aging Cell
                (2020)
              




Abstract|BackgroundOn the basis of data from a phase 2 trial that compared the checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab at doses of 0.3 mg, 3 mg, and 10 mg per kilogram of body weight in patients with advanced melanoma, this phase 3 trial evaluated ipilimumab at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram in patients who had undergone complete resection of stage III melanoma. MethodsAfter patients had undergone complete resection of stage III cutaneous melanoma, we randomly assigned them to receive ipilimumab at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram (475 patients) or placebo (476) every 3 weeks for four doses, then every 3 months for up to 3 years or until disease recurrence or an unacceptable level of toxic effects occurred. Recurrence-free survival was the primary end point. Secondary end points included overall survival, distant metastasis–free survival, and safety. ResultsAt a median follow-up of 5.3 years, the 5-year rate of recurrence-free survival was 40.8% in the ipilimumab group, as compared with 30.3% in the placebo group (hazard ratio for recurrence or death, 0.76; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.64 to 0.89; P<0.001). The rate of overall survival at 5 years was 65.4% in the ipilimumab group, as compared with 54.4% in the placebo group (hazard ratio for death, 0.72; 95.1% CI, 0.58 to 0.88; P=0.001). The rate of distant metastasis–free survival at 5 years was 48.3% in the ipilimumab group, as compared with 38.9% in the placebo group (hazard ratio for death or distant metastasis, 0.76; 95.8% CI, 0.64 to 0.92; P=0.002). Adverse events of grade 3 or 4 occurred in 54.1% of the patients in the ipilimumab group and in 26.2% of those in the placebo group. Immune-related adverse events of grade 3 or 4 occurred in 41.6% of the patients in the ipilimumab group and in 2.7% of those in the placebo group. In the ipilimumab group, 5 patients (1.1%) died owing to immune-related adverse events. ConclusionsAs adjuvant therapy for high-risk stage III melanoma, ipilimumab at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram resulted in significantly higher rates of recurrence-free survival, overall survival, and distant metastasis–free survival than placebo. There were more immune-related adverse events with ipilimumab than with placebo. (Funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00636168, and EudraCT number, 2007-001974-10.)
IntroductionIpilimumab,|a fully human monoclonal antibody that blocks cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) to augment antitumor immune responses, was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency in 2011 at a dose of 3 mg per kilogram of body weight for the treatment of advanced melanoma.1,2 On the basis of data from a phase 2 trial that indicated the potential for a dose of 10 mg per kilogram to have higher efficacy than the dose of 0.3 mg or 3 mg per kilogram in patients with advanced melanoma, although at a cost of more toxic effects,3,4 we conducted a phase 3 trial (European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer [EORTC] 18071) of ipilimumab at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram in patients who had resected regional lymph node–positive (stage III) melanoma with a high risk of recurrence.The likelihood of systemic metastatic disease among patients with stage III melanoma correlates closely with microscopic versus palpable nodal disease and with the number of positive nodes.5-7 The population of patients with stage III melanoma is heterogeneous, with disease-specific survival rates of 78% among patients with stage IIIA disease, 59% among those with stage IIIB disease, and 40% among those with stage IIIC disease.5-7 Even within the population of patients who have sentinel node–positive cancer, heterogeneity is remarkable and correlates closely with tumor load in the sentinel node (as defined by the Rotterdam criteria; see the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org).8-10 Patients with a metastasis of more than 1 mm in the greatest dimension have a significantly higher risk of recurrence or death than those with a metastasis of 1 mm or less in the greatest dimension.8-10We previously reported the primary results of the EORTC 18071 phase 3 trial in which we compared adjuvant ipilimumab with placebo in patients with resected stage III melanoma.11 At a median follow-up of 2.7 years, adjuvant ipilimumab was associated with significantly prolonged recurrence-free survival, the primary end point, as compared with placebo (hazard ratio, 0.75; P=0.001). The results on the global health scale, which was the primary health-related quality-of-life end point, were not affected by ipilimumab.12 Approval from the FDA was granted in 2015 on the basis of the results of this trial. The effect of ipilimumab on overall survival and distant metastasis–free survival is important, given that the only other approved systemic therapy in the context of adjuvant therapy, interferon alfa, has a marginal effect on overall survival.13-15 Here, we report, at a median follow-up of 5.3 years, the efficacy of adjuvant therapy with ipilimumab on all survival end points in patients with high-risk stage III melanoma after complete lymph-node dissection.
Methods|Patients Eligible patients were 18 years of age or older with histologically confirmed cutaneous melanoma that was metastatic to regional lymph nodes. According to the American Joint Committee on Cancer 2009 classification, patients had stage IIIA melanoma (patients with N1a cancer [i.e., only one node involved with micrometastasis] had to have at least one metastasis measuring >1 mm in the greatest dimension) or stage IIIB or IIIC melanoma with no in-transit metastases (i.e., growing >2 cm away from the primary tumor but before reaching the nearest lymph node).2 Complete regional lymphadenectomy was required within 12 weeks before randomization. Exclusion criteria included an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance-status score of more than 1 (on a scale from 0 to 5, with higher numbers indicating greater disability), autoimmune disease, uncontrolled infection, substantial cardiovascular disease (New York Heart Association functional class III or IV), a lactate dehydrogenase level of more than 2 times the upper limit of the normal range, use of systemic glucocorticoids, and previous systemic therapy for melanoma. Trial Design and Regimen In this randomized, double-blind, phase 3 trial, patients were enrolled at 99 centers in 19 countries. Registration was done centrally at the EORTC headquarters. A central interactive voice-response system was used for randomization and was based on a minimization technique.16 Randomization was stratified according to disease stage (stage IIIA vs. stage IIIB vs. stage IIIC with one, two, or three positive nodes vs. stage IIIC with four or more positive nodes) and geographic region (North America, Europe, or Australia). Local pharmacists, who were aware of the trial-group assignments, performed the randomization. Clinical investigators and persons collecting or analyzing the data were unaware of the trial-group assignments. Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive an intravenous infusion of ipilimumab at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram or placebo every 3 weeks for four doses, then every 3 months for up to 3 years or until disease recurrence, an unacceptable level of toxic effects, a major protocol violation, or withdrawal of consent (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix). The rules regarding the withholding of a dose of ipilimumab or placebo and the management of immune-related adverse events are detailed in the full trial protocol, available at NEJM.org. The primary end point was recurrence-free survival. The secondary end points included overall survival, distant metastasis–free survival, safety, and health-related quality of life. Assessments Patients in the two trial groups were assessed for recurrence and distant metastases every 3 months during the first 3 years and every 6 months thereafter. Physical examination and radiography of the chest, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or other imaging techniques were performed if indicated. Recurrence or metastatic lesions had to be histologically confirmed whenever possible. The first date when recurrence was observed was used in the analysis, regardless of the method of assessment. Recurrence-free survival was defined as the time from randomization until the date of first recurrence (local, regional, or distant metastasis) or death from any cause. Overall survival was defined as the time from randomization until death from any cause. Distant metastasis–free survival was defined as the time from randomization until the date of the first distant metastasis or death from any cause. Data on adverse events were collected for each group with the use of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 3.0. Immune-related adverse events were determined programmatically from a prespecified list of terms from the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA), which was updated according to each new version of MedDRA. Resolution of an immune-related adverse event of grade 3 or 4 was defined as an improvement to grade 1 or less. The grade 3 or 4 event with the longest time to resolution was selected for inclusion in the analysis. If the grade 3 or 4 event did not resolve, follow-up was censored at the last known date that the patient was alive. Similar analyses were repeated for immune-related adverse events of grade 2 through 5. Trial Oversight The trial protocol was approved by the EORTC protocol-review committee and by independent ethics committees. The trial was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and with Good Clinical Practice guidelines as defined by the International Conference on Harmonisation. All the patients provided written informed consent. The trial was funded and sponsored by Bristol-Myers Squibb. The trial was designed by the writing committee (the trial coordinator [the first author], the EORTC headquarters team, and a representative of the sponsor). Data were collected and computerized at the EORTC headquarters and were copied to the sponsor after the database lock. Data were analyzed independently at the EORTC headquarters and by the sponsor. The manuscript was written by two of the academic authors (the first and penultimate authors), all the coauthors commented on it, and editorial assistance was provided by professional medical writers paid by the sponsor. The two specified academic authors made the decision to submit the manuscript for publication, with the consent of all the other authors. The authors vouch for accuracy and completeness of the data and analyses and confirm the adherence of the trial to the protocol. An independent review committee, whose members were unaware of the trial-group assignments, assessed disease status and date of recurrence. An independent data and safety monitoring board assessed the safety and efficacy data every 6 months, without formal interim analyses. Only at the time of the final analysis of recurrence-free survival were interim analyses of overall survival and distant metastasis–free survival performed by an independent statistician, and the results were forwarded to members of the data and safety monitoring board. On-site source-data verification was provided by a clinical research organization. Statistical Analysis We planned for the trial to include 950 patients. In the initial protocol, we calculated that a total of 491 deaths would be required in order to provide the trial with 85% power to detect a difference in the 4.5-year overall survival rates of 42.3% in the placebo group and 52.0% in the ipilimumab group, corresponding to a hazard ratio for death of 0.76. Owing to an improvement in outcomes after recurrence (because of a change in the treatment landscape for patients with melanoma), it was decided, by means of a protocol amendment, to perform the final analyses for overall survival and distant metastasis–free survival at the same time. Given the 506 events of distant metastasis or death and 376 deaths at the clinical cutoff date (January 31, 2016), it was recomputed (with the use of a Lan–DeMets alpha-spending function) that the final analyses of overall survival and distant metastasis–free survival be performed at two-sided alpha levels of 0.049 and 0.042, respectively, so the confidence interval for the hazard ratio of the group comparison regarding these end points was set at 95.1% and 95.8%, respectively; the statistical power was 75.8% and 89.4%, respectively. The statistical analysis plan (available with the trial protocol) indicated that in order to preserve the alpha error, a hierarchical-testing approach would be applied after the analysis of the primary end point of recurrence-free survival. Overall survival was tested first, followed by distant metastasis–free survival. For the subgroup analysis, the estimated hazard ratio was plotted along with its 99% confidence interval. The main analyses of the efficacy end points included all the patients who had undergone randomization, according to the intention-to-treat principle. The safety profile was assessed in patients who received at least one dose of the randomly assigned regimen. Details of the statistical methods are provided in the Supplementary Appendix.
Results|Patients and Trial Regimen Table 1. Table 1. Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of the Patients at Baseline.From July 2008 through August 2011, a total of 951 patients underwent randomization: 475 patients were assigned to the ipilimumab group and 476 to the placebo group. The characteristics at baseline were similar between the two randomized groups (Table 1). Six patients (4 patients in the ipilimumab group and 2 in the placebo group) did not start the randomly assigned regimen (Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Appendix). The median number of doses that were received was 4 doses (interquartile range, 3 to 8) in the ipilimumab group and 8 (interquartile range, 4 to 16) in the placebo group. At least 1 maintenance dose (dose 5 and beyond) was received by 198 of 471 patients (42.0%) in the ipilimumab group and by 332 of 474 (70.0%) in the placebo group. Of 471 patients who started ipilimumab, 251 (53.3%) discontinued treatment owing to an adverse event (including 182 patients [38.6%] who discontinued within 12 weeks after randomization); in 240 patients (51.0%), the event was considered by the investigators to be drug-related. Among 474 patients who received placebo, 22 (4.6%) discontinued treatment owing to an adverse event. A total of 135 patients (28.7%) in the ipilimumab group discontinued treatment because of disease recurrence, as compared with 282 (59.5%) in the placebo group. A total of 63 patients (13.4%) in the ipilimumab group and 143 (30.2%) in the placebo group completed the 3-year treatment period (Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Appendix). The overall median follow-up was 5.3 years. The median follow-up was 5.3 years in the ipilimumab group and 5.4 years in the placebo group. Efficacy and Postprotocol Treatment Figure 1. Figure 1. Kaplan–Meier Estimates of Recurrence-free Survival (RFS), Overall Survival, and Distant Metastasis–free Survival (DMFS).Panel A shows the Kaplan–Meier estimate of recurrence-free survival according to the independent review committee. In the ipilimumab group, local or regional recurrence was reported in 96 patients, distant metastasis or death due to melanoma in 157, and death due to another cause or an unknown cause in 11. In the placebo group, local or regional recurrence was reported in 114 patients, distant metastasis or death due to melanoma in 204, and death due to another cause or an unknown cause in 5. All the statistical comparisons shown here were stratified according to the disease stage as provided at randomization. In the comparison that was stratified according to the disease stage as given on case-report forms, the hazard ratio for recurrence or death was 0.77 (95% CI, 0.65 to 0.90; P=0.001). In a per-protocol analysis of the comparison that was stratified according to the disease stage as given at randomization, the hazard ratio was 0.77 (95% CI, 0.65 to 0.91; P=0.002). Panel B shows the Kaplan–Meier estimate of overall survival. Because the number of patients with a follow-up of more than 7 years was too small, the estimated median overall survival was either unreliable or not reached. In the comparison that was stratified according to the disease stage as given on case-report forms, the hazard ratio for death was 0.73 (95.1% CI, 0.60 to 0.90; P=0.003). In a per-protocol analysis of the comparison stratified according to the disease stage as given at randomization, the hazard ratio was 0.72 (95.1% CI, 0.58 to 0.89; P=0.002). Panel C shows the Kaplan–Meier estimate of distant metastasis–free survival according to the independent review committee. In the comparison that was stratified according to the disease stage as given on the case-report forms, the hazard ratio for distant metastasis or death was 0.77 (95.8% CI, 0.65 to 0.93; P=0.004). In a per-protocol analysis of the comparison stratified according to the disease stage as given at randomization, the hazard ratio was 0.76 (95.8% CI, 0.63 to 0.91; P=0.003).In this updated analysis, the rate of recurrence-free survival at 5 years was 40.8% in the ipilimumab group, as compared with 30.3% in the placebo group (hazard ratio for recurrence or death, 0.76; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.64 to 0.89; P<0.001) (Figure 1A). The overall significant prolongation of recurrence-free survival that was due to adjuvant ipilimumab appeared to be consistent across subgroups (Fig. S3A in the Supplementary Appendix), but the trial was not powered to provide robust subgroup analysis. Ipilimumab appeared to be helpful in patients with microscopic involvement (hazard ratio vs. placebo, 0.68) and in patients with macroscopic involvement (hazard ratio, 0.84) (Fig. S3B and S3C in the Supplementary Appendix). Table 2. Table 2. Postprotocol Treatment in All the Patients Who Underwent Randomization and in Those Who Had Disease Recurrence or Died.Among the 264 patients in the ipilimumab group who had recurrence or died, 194 had received at least one postprotocol treatment (Table 2). These treatments included ipilimumab (24 patients), anti–programmed death 1 (PD-1) therapy (24 patients), and a BRAF inhibitor (63 patients). Among the 323 patients in the placebo group who had recurrence or died, 250 received postprotocol treatment: ipilimumab (76 patients), anti–PD-1 therapy (30 patients), and a BRAF inhibitor (88 patients). Overall survival after disease recurrence was similar in the two trial groups (hazard ratio for ipilimumab vs. placebo, 0.89), which suggests that the difference in recurrence-free survival would persist in terms of overall survival. Figure 2. Figure 2. Forest Plot for Overall Survival, According to Trial Group.Results are expressed as unstratified hazard ratios for the risk of death in the ipilimumab group as compared with the placebo group with 95% confidence intervals for the analysis of the total group and with 99% confidence intervals for all the subgroup analyses. The size of the box is proportional to the total number of deaths reported in each subgroup, the diamond is centered on the overall hazard ratio for death and covers its 95% confidence interval, and the dashed line represents the overall hazard ratio for death. The P value for the univariate analysis that included all patients was provided by the unstratified log-rank test. The P value for the analysis of heterogeneity between the hazard ratios computed within the subgroups of a given variable was provided by the test of heterogeneity (see the Supplementary Appendix). The disease stage, according to the case-report forms, was determined with the use of the American Joint Committee on Cancer 2002 criteria. The number of positive lymph nodes was determined by means of pathological testing. Additional information is provided in Fig. S4A in the Supplementary Appendix.The overall survival rate at 5 years was 65.4% (95% CI, 60.8 to 69.6) in the ipilimumab group, as compared with 54.4% (95% CI, 49.7 to 58.9) in the placebo group. Overall survival was significantly longer in the ipilimumab group than in the placebo group (hazard ratio for death from any cause, 0.72; 95.1% CI, 0.58 to 0.88; P=0.001) (Figure 1B). The prolongation of overall survival with ipilimumab was generally consistent across subgroups (Figure 2, and Fig. S4 in the Supplementary Appendix). The rate of distant metastasis–free survival at 5 years was higher in the ipilimumab group than in the placebo group (48.3% vs. 38.9%; hazard ratio for distant metastasis or death, 0.76; 95.8% CI, 0.64 to 0.92; P=0.002) (Figure 1C). Safety Table 3. Table 3. Immune-Related Adverse Events.Among the 471 patients who received ipilimumab, 465 (98.7%) had an adverse event of any grade, with grade 3 or 4 adverse events occurring in 255 patients (54.1%); among the 474 patients who received placebo, 432 (91.1%) had an adverse event of any grade, with grade 3 or 4 adverse events occurring in 124 (26.2%) (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix). Immune-related adverse events during the trial were more frequent with ipilimumab than with placebo (Table 3). Immune-related adverse events of grade 3 or 4 occurred in 41.6% of the patients in the ipilimumab group and in 2.7% of those in the placebo group. The most common immune-related adverse events of grade 3 or 4 in the ipilimumab group were gastrointestinal (in 16.1% of the patients), hepatic (in 10.8%), and endocrine (in 7.9%). The median time to the onset of immune-related adverse events of grade 2 through 5 during the trial ranged from 4.0 weeks (skin immune-related adverse events) to 13.1 weeks (neurologic immune-related adverse events) (Table S2 in the Supplementary Appendix). Endocrine immune-related adverse events of grade 2 through 5 resolved in 51.5% of the patients, and the median time to resolution was 54.3 weeks. The majority (82 to 97%) of all other immune-related adverse events of grade 2, 3, or 4 resolved, and the median time to resolution ranged from 4.0 to 8.0 weeks. Five patients (1.1%) died owing to adverse events that were attributed to ipilimumab: three patients died from colitis (two patients with intestinal perforation), one patient from myocarditis, and one patient from multiorgan failure that was associated with the Guillain–Barré syndrome. These deaths occurred before the start of maintenance therapy. Of these patients, four had received glucocorticoids and one anti–tumor necrosis factor antibodies.
Discussion|In this randomized, phase 3 trial involving patients with resected, high-risk stage III melanoma, ipilimumab at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram significantly prolonged overall survival and distant metastasis–free survival as compared with placebo. The risk of death was 28% lower with ipilimumab than with placebo, and the risk of distant metastasis or death was lower by 24%. At 5 years, ipilimumab treatment was associated with rates that were approximately 10 percentage points higher than the rates with placebo for all end points: recurrence-free survival (40.8% vs. 30.3%), overall survival (65.4% vs. 54.4%), and distant metastasis–free survival (48.3% vs. 38.9%). The results show that at the cost of substantial toxic effects, the previously observed prolongation of recurrence-free survival with ipilimumab is confirmed in the current updated analysis and that it translated into a prolongation in overall survival and distant metastasis–free survival. Despite successful treatment with surgery (followed by adjuvant therapy in patients at high risk for disease recurrence), only approximately 45% of patients with stage III melanoma will be disease-free after 4 years; less than 40% of patients who have surgery alone will be disease-free after 4 years.17 Interferon alfa is currently approved in both the United States and the European Union for the treatment of stage III melanoma after surgery. In a literature-based meta-analysis of 17 randomized, controlled trials involving 8122 patients with high-risk cutaneous melanoma, interferon alfa prolonged the time to recurrence (hazard ratio for disease recurrence with interferon alfa vs. observation, 0.82).15 Owing to the marginal benefit in overall survival (hazard ratio for death, 0.89) and the considerable toxic effects, interferon alfa is not widely used as an adjuvant therapy.18 Although the benefit–risk profile of interferon alfa as compared with ipilimumab remains unclear, a phase 3 trial (ECOG 1609) that directly compares interferon alfa with ipilimumab at a dose of 3 or 10 mg per kilogram in patients with resected stage III or IV melanoma is ongoing (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01274338). In our trial (EORTC 18071), patients were treated for up to 3 years, but only 13.4% of the patients completed this treatment period and 40% had stopped ipilimumab treatment at the end of the first four doses over the first 3 months. Thus, the EORTC 18071 trial cannot address whether maintenance treatment is necessary. In the current trial, the survival benefit of ipilimumab over placebo was generally consistent across subgroups. This benefit was observed not only in patients with microscopic involvement only (sentinel node–positive) but also in patients with macroscopic or palpable nodes. In contrast, in previous EORTC trials of adjuvant therapy in patients with melanoma,17,19-22 a significant benefit with interferon alfa was observed only in patients with microscopic involvement. Similarly, in contrast to interferon alfa, for which ulceration is the overriding determinant of activity,13,17,20-23 ipilimumab prolonged survival among patients with nonulcerated melanoma and among those with ulcerated melanoma. The rate of adverse events with ipilimumab in the context of adjuvant therapy was substantial and led to the discontinuation of treatment in approximately 40% of the patients by the end of the initial dosing period (i.e., before maintenance therapy). This frequency is higher than that observed with the same dose in the pooled analysis involving patients with advanced melanoma.2-4 The vast majority of immune-related adverse events of grade 2, 3, or 4 resolved within 4 to 8 weeks with the use of established management guidelines. However, for endocrinopathies, the median time to resolution was 54 weeks, and 48.5% of the patients who had endocrinopathy continue to take hormone-replacement therapies. In this trial, adjuvant therapy with ipilimumab was associated with a higher risk and greater degree of diarrhea, insomnia, and fatigue than placebo during the induction period, but ipilimumab did not have a negative effect on the global health scale of health-related quality of life.12 Of concern are the five patients (1.1%) in the ipilimumab group who died owing to drug-related adverse events. In the context of adjuvant therapy, the benefit–risk profile is particularly important in view of the prognostic heterogeneity observed in patients with stage III melanoma. In conclusion, adjuvant ipilimumab was associated with clinical improvements and significantly prolonged overall survival and distant metastasis–free survival, as compared with placebo, among patients with high-risk stage III melanoma, thus extending previous findings of a prolongation of recurrence-free survival. Adverse events were common but mostly transient. Some adverse events were serious, and even death from treatment occurred despite the use of established treatment algorithms.
Abstract|The development of the body plan in the Drosophila embryo depends on the activity of maternal determinants localized at the anterior and posterior of the egg. These activities define both the polarity of the anterior-posterior (AP) axis and the spatial domains of expression of the zygotic gap genes, which in turn control the subsequent steps in segmentation. The nature and mode of action of one anterior determinant, the bicoid(bcd) gene product, has recently been defined, but the posterior determinants are less well characterized. At least seven maternally acting genes are required for posterior development. Mutations in these maternal posterior-group genes result in embryos lacking all abdominal segments. Cytoplasmic transplantation studies indicate that the maternally encoded product of the nanos(nos) gene may act as an abdominal determinant, whereas the other maternal posterior-group genes appear to be required for the appropriate localization and stabilization of this signal. Here we show that the lack of the nos gene product can be compensated for by eliminating the maternal activity of the gap gene hunchback (hb). Embryos lacking both of these maternally derived gene products are viable and can survive as fertile adults. These results suggest that the nos gene product functions by repressing the activity of the maternal hb products in the posterior of the egg.
Abstract|BackgroundCytokeratins are specific markers of epithelial cancer cells in bone marrow. We assessed the influence of cytokeratin-positive micrometastases in the bone marrow on the prognosis of women with breast cancer. MethodsWe obtained bone marrow aspirates from both upper iliac crests of 552 patients with stage I, II, or III breast cancer who underwent complete resection of the tumor and 191 patients with nonmalignant disease. The specimens were stained with the monoclonal antibody A45-B/B3, which binds to an antigen on cytokeratins. The median follow-up was 38 months (range, 10 to 70). The primary end point was survival. ResultsCytokeratin-positive cells were detected in the bone marrow specimens of 2 of the 191 control patients with nonmalignant conditions (1 percent) and 199 of the 552 patients with breast cancer (36 percent). The presence of occult metastatic cells in bone marrow was unrelated to the presence or absence of lymph-node metastasis (P=0.13). After four years of follow-up, the presence of micrometastases in bone marrow was associated with the occurrence of clinically overt distant metastasis and death from cancer-related causes (P<0.001), but not with locoregional relapse (P=0.77). Of 199 patients with occult metastatic cells, 49 died of cancer, whereas of 353 patients without such cells, 22 died of cancer-related causes (P<0.001). Among the 301 women without lymph-node metastases, 14 of the 100 with bone marrow micrometastases died of cancer-related causes, as did 2 of the 201 without bone marrow micrometastases (P<0.001). The presence of occult metastatic cells in bone marrow, as compared with their absence, was an independent prognostic indicator of the risk of death from cancer (relative risk, 4.17; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.51 to 6.94; P<0.001), after adjustment for the use of systemic adjuvant chemotherapy. ConclusionsThe presence of occult cytokeratin-positive metastatic cells in bone marrow increases the risk of relapse in patients with stage I, II, or III breast cancer.
IntroductionThe|search for occult metastatic cells in patients with small, curatively resected tumors is of considerable importance, because early dissemination of tumor cells is one of the leading causes of relapse at distant sites1,2 and of death from cancer.3 Immunocytochemical methods to search for occult tumor cells in the bone marrow were originally used in patients with breast cancer,4 but the clinical significance of such cells is controversial. In patients with colorectal,5 gastric,6 and non–small-cell lung7 carcinomas, cytokeratin-specific monoclonal antibodies have been used to identify ectopic epithelial cells in the bone marrow. The presence of these cells was shown to influence the prognosis in patients with these tumors. In breast cancer, antibodies against antigens of the polymorphic epithelial mucin family,8 such as epithelial membrane antigen, human-milk-fat globule, or tumor-associated glycoprotein 12, have been used for this purpose.9-11 However, reports of a positive correlation between clinical outcome and the presence of cells in bone marrow that reacted with these antibodies were questioned when it was found that both epithelial membrane antigen and tumor-associated glycoprotein 12 were expressed not only by epithelial cells but also by plasmacytes and erythroid precursors.12-18 One early study of 49 patients reported that cytokeratin-specific antibodies could detect breast-cancer micrometastases in bone marrow smears.19 These results prompted us to conduct a prospective study using a standardized immunocytochemical technique, a defined number of bone marrow cells, and a monoclonal antibody against an antigen shared by various cytokeratin peptides. Additional justification for the use of cytokeratin-specific antibodies to detect breast-cancer cells in bone marrow is provided by the finding of multiple chromosomal aberrations in cytokeratin-positive micrometastases of cells in interphase by fluorescence in situ hybridization20 or by comparative hybridization of genomic DNA.21 These results demonstrate that cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow are indeed tumor cells.
Methods|Patients From January 1994 to December 1997, 743 consecutive patients admitted to the I. Frauenklinik at Ludwig Maximilians University in Munich and the Zentralklinikum in Augsburg, Germany, were studied. Patients underwent bone marrow aspiration from both upper iliac crests after providing written informed consent and before the removal of the primary carcinoma. The procedure was approved by the institutional review boards. The stage and grade of the tumor were classified according to the tumor–node–metastasis classification of the Union Internationale contre le Cancer22 by investigators unaware of the immunocytochemical findings in bone marrow. In addition, immunocytochemical analysis of the bone marrow specimens was performed without knowledge of the histopathological results. In this manner, we examined bone marrow obtained from 552 patients with stage I, II, or III breast cancer; 153 patients with benign lesions of the breast, such as fibroadenomas, mastitis, abscesses, and cysts; 11 with simple cysts; 10 with cystadenoma of the ovaries; and 17 with cervical intraepithelial neoplasms of grade I or II. In the 552 patients with breast cancer, the primary surgical treatment consisted of breast conservation in 298 and modified radical mastectomy in 254. The tumor was completely resected in all patients, and the routine procedures included dissection of axillary lymph nodes of levels I and II. For the diagnosis of lymph-node metastasis, single embedded lymph nodes were screened at up to three levels. All 298 patients treated with breast-conserving surgery received radiation therapy. Irradiation of the chest wall followed mastectomy in 94 patients. The median absorbed dose in the target area was either 50.0 Gy, given in 25 fractions, or 50.4 Gy, given in 28 fractions (in patients who received concomitant chemotherapy). Of 170 postmenopausal women with node-positive breast cancer, 72 women who had estrogen-receptor–positive tumors received 20 to 30 mg of tamoxifen daily, and it was recommended that therapy last two to five years. Both premenopausal and postmenopausal patients with estrogen-receptor–negative tumors were treated with chemotherapy. A total of 59 patients with one to three involved axillary lymph nodes received six cycles of chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide (600 mg per square meter of body-surface area), methotrexate (40 mg per square meter), and fluorouracil (600 mg per square meter) every 21 days. In 101 patients who had at least four involved regional lymph nodes, four courses of epirubicin (90 mg per square meter) and cyclophosphamide (600 mg per square meter) were administered, followed by three courses of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil. All 19 patients with evidence of inflammatory breast cancer (all of whom had node-positive cancer) received three cycles of chemotherapy before and after surgery, consisting of either epirubicin and cyclophosphamide or epirubicin (90 mg per square meter) and paclitaxel (175 mg per square meter). Of 301 patients with node-negative cancer, 33 received tamoxifen alone, 23 received more than one agent, and 245 did not receive any systemic adjuvant therapy. At the time of primary surgery, the base-line diagnostic evaluation for distant metastases included plain chest radiography, mammography of the contralateral breast, ultrasonography of the liver, and bone scanning of the entire body. These examinations showed no evidence of distant metastases in any of the patients. After surgery, the patients underwent clinical examinations every three months and were further tested only if they had symptoms. The findings reported here were documented in all patients as of August 16, 1999. Preparation of Bone Marrow The procedure for bone marrow preparation has been described previously.16 In short, while the patient was under general anesthesia bone marrow samples were obtained from each upper iliac crest by needle aspiration during primary surgery and stored in heparin-treated tubes. Mononuclear cells were separated by Ficoll–Hypaque density-gradient centrifugation (density, 1.077 g per mole) at 900×g for 30 minutes, the cells were washed and centrifuged at 150×g for 5 minutes, and 1 million cells were placed on each glass slide.16 Aspirates yielded between 4.0×106 and 6.6×107 bone marrow cells (mean, 1.5×107). Immunocytochemical Analysis For each patient, we screened 2×106 cells by bright-field microscopy; an identical number of cells served as a control for staining with an irrelevant immunoglobulin. We did not use morphologic features to identify cells; we used only immunocytochemical staining. Because there was no background staining, there were no indeterminate results. All slides were examined independently by two observers who agreed on the results for over 95 percent of specimens. In the case of discrepant results, the two investigators reevaluated the slide and eventually reached a consensus. We used monoclonal antibody A45-B/B3 (Micromet, Munich, Germany), which is directed against a common epitope on cytokeratin polypeptides, including the cytokeratin heterodimers 8–18 and 8–19,23 at a concentration of 1.0 to 2.0 μg per milliliter to detect tumor cells in cytospin preparations of bone marrow. The specificity of the antibody reaction in the bone marrow specimens was confirmed by the addition of an unrelated mouse myeloma immunoglobulin at an appropriate dilution. The breast-cancer cell line BT-20 served as a positive control for cytokeratin immunostaining.16 The reaction of the primary antibody was developed with the alkaline phosphatase anti–alkaline phosphatase technique combined with the new fuchsin stain24 to indicate antibody binding, as previously described.16  Statistical Analysis We verified all reported immunocytochemical and histopathological results and reports of events (death, relapse, or recurrent disease) during follow-up by reexamining the original data files. The primary end point was survival, measured from the date of surgery to the time of the last follow-up visit or cancer-related death. Secondary end points were locoregional relapse (including recurrences in the ipsilateral and contralateral breast) and distant metastasis and were measured in the same way as was the primary end point. We constructed Kaplan–Meier life-table curves for survival free of locoregional and distant recurrences and overall survival.25 We used the log-rank test to compare the patients with bone marrow micrometastases with those without micrometastases. Data on patients who were alive and had no evidence of disease at the end of our study were censored. We used Cox proportional-hazards analysis to estimate the prognostic effect of various variables. The variables were entered in a stepwise fashion into the model to compare the independent prognostic value of bone marrow micrometastasis with that of other prognostically relevant variables.26 We used the chi-square test to compare categorical variables. We used the Mann–Whitney U test to assess the differences in the means. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference. All tests were two-tailed. For statistical analyses, we used SPSS software for Macintosh (version 6.1.1).
Results|Detection of Micrometastases Figure 1. Figure 1. Immunostaining of Occult Metastatic Cells in Bone Marrow with Monoclonal Antibody A45-B/B3 (×1000). Panel A shows a single metastatic cell. Panel B shows a cluster of eight micrometastatic cells. There is no immunostaining of surrounding bone marrow cells. Bone marrow aspirates were obtained from 552 patients with newly diagnosed breast cancer, none of whom had a history of epithelial cancer. Of these patients, 199 (36 percent) had cytokeratin-positive tumor cells in the bone marrow at the time of the initial resection of the primary tumor. In most specimens (185 of 199 [93 percent]) the occult cells were present as dispersed single cells (Figure 1A); clusters of cells (Figure 1B) were found in only 7 percent of specimens (14 of 199). The overall frequency of occult metastatic cells in each specimen was low; there was a median of 3 cytokeratin-positive cells (range, 1 to 1223) per 2×106 bone marrow cells analyzed. The numbers of detectable tumor cells increased with the tumor stage; for example, patients with stage I cancer had a mean of 5 tumor cells per 2×106 bone marrow cells, and patients with stage II disease and those with stage III disease had means of 9 and 86 tumor cells per 2×106 bone marrow cells, respectively. Bone marrow aspirates from 191 patients with nonmalignant disease were also analyzed in a blinded fashion, before the final histopathological result was disclosed. In only two patients (1 percent) in this group — one with a chronic benign inflammation of the breast and the other with a benign cystadenoma of the ovary — were specifically stained cytokeratin-positive cells detected. Characteristics of the Patients Table 1. Table 1. Clinical Characteristics of 552 Patients with Breast Cancer, According to the Presence or Absence of Occult Metastatic Cells in Bone Marrow.  Table 1 shows the clinical characteristics of the study population. Most patients (58 percent) had primary tumors that were no more than 2 cm in diameter. Larger primary tumors were associated with a higher incidence of micrometastases than were tumors that were 2 cm or less in diameter (P<0.001). Of 43 patients with stage pT4 tumors (invasion of contiguous structures), 19 had inflammatory breast cancer; 15 of these 19 patients (79 percent) had occult metastatic cells in the marrow (P<0.001). Twenty-three percent of patients with stage pT1a tumors had occult disease, as did 35 percent of patients with stage pT1b tumors and 30 percent of patients with pT1c tumors (P=0.56 for the difference among the groups). Although histologic involvement of axillary lymph nodes is the standard risk factor used for prognos-tic evaluation, we found that the incidence of bone marrow micrometastases was similar in patients with lymph-node metastasis and those without it (P= 0.13). Of 301 patients without clinical or histopathological signs of lymph-node metastases, 100 (33 percent) had cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow (Table 1). Table 1 shows that the number of lymph nodes with metastases was significantly associated with the presence of bone marrow micrometastases (P<0.001). Bone Marrow Micrometastases and Recurrence of Disease Figure 2. Figure 2. Kaplan–Meier Life-Table Analysis of the Survival of Patients with Breast Cancer, According to the Presence or Absence of Micrometastases. Panel A shows survival free of distant metastasis. Patients with occult metastatic cells in bone marrow had a higher risk of relapse than patients without occult metastatic cells (relative risk, 5.99; 95 percent confidence interval, 3.89 to 9.23; P<0.001 by the log-rank test). Panel B shows overall survival. Patients with occult metastatic cells in bone marrow had a higher risk of cancer-related death than patients without occult metastatic cells (relative risk, 4.28; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.59 to 7.09; P<0.001). Panel C shows the overall survival of patients with node-negative cancer and patients with node-positive cancer. Patients with node-negative cancer who had occult metastatic cells had a higher risk of cancer-related death than patients with node-negative cancer who did not have occult metastatic cells (relative risk, 13.26; 95 percent confidence interval, 3.01 to 58.46; P<0.001). Patients with node-positive cancer who had occult metastatic cells had a higher risk of cancer-related death than patients with node-positive cancer who did not have occult metastatic cells (relative risk, 3.32; 95 percent confidence interval, 1.91 to 5.76; P<0.001). There was no significant difference in survival between patients with node-negative cancer who had occult metastatic cells and patients with node-positive cancer who did not have occult metastatic cells (P=0.84). After a median follow-up of 38 months (range, 10 to 70), relapse of the tumor occurred in 135 patients: 28 of these women (21 percent) had locoregional relapse, and 107 (79 percent) had distant metastases. Whereas locoregional relapses were not associated with the presence of micrometastases in bone marrow, as compared with their absence (relative risk of relapse, 0.89; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.39 to 2.01; P=0.77), distant metastasis was significantly associated with the presence of occult micrometastases in the marrow (Figure 2A). Of 33 patients with relapses at visceral sites, 13 had bone marrow involvement. In contrast, micrometastases were found in 18 of 19 patients with relapses in the skeleton and in 48 of 55 patients with relapses at visceral sites in combination with skeletal metastases (P<0.001). Bone Marrow Micrometastases and Survival Of 199 patients with occult metastatic cells, 49 died of cancer-related causes (25 percent), whereas of 353 patients without occult tumor cells in the marrow only 22 died of breast cancer (6 percent). As shown in Figure 2B, patients with bone marrow micrometastasis had a higher risk of death from cancer than patients without bone marrow micrometastases (relative risk, 4.28; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.59 to 7.09; P<0.001). Among women with cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow, as compared with those without such cells, the relative risk of death was 3.32 among patients with node-positive cancer (95 percent confidence interval, 1.91 to 5.76; P<0.001) and 13.26 among patients with node-negative cancer (95 percent confidence interval, 3.01 to 58.46; P<0.001) (Figure 2C). Among 100 patients with node-negative cancer and micrometastases, 14 (14 percent) died of cancer-related causes, whereas only 2 patients (1 percent) died of cancer-related causes in the group of 201 patients without micrometastases. There was no significant difference in survival, however, between patients with node-negative cancer who had micrometastases and patients with node-positive cancer who did not have micrometastases (Figure 2C). Bone Marrow Micrometastases and Adjuvant Therapy Since the occurrence of locoregional relapse and distant metastasis may be influenced by adjuvant treatment, we performed a separate analysis of the 245 patients with node-negative cancer who did not receive systemic adjuvant therapy. Of these patients, 81 (33 percent) had occult metastatic cells. Clinically overt distant metastases occurred in 18 of 81 patients (22 percent) with micrometastases (relative risk of distant metastasis, 7.4; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.7 to 19.9; P<0.001), as compared with 4 of 164 patients (2 percent) without micrometastases. Moreover, among the patients who did not receive adjuvant therapy, the relative risk of cancer-related death was higher among the 81 patients with micrometastases than among the 164 without micrometastases (10 deaths [12 percent] vs. 1 death [1 percent]; relative risk, 18.9; 95 percent confidence interval, 2.4 to 70.5; P<0.001). Among the 51 patients with node-negative cancer who had well-differentiated (grade 1) or moderately well differentiated (grade 2) small tumors (≤1 cm in diameter) that were positive for estrogen receptors, 11 (22 percent) had micrometastases in the marrow. Of these 11 patients, 2 had both locoregional relapse and distant metastases at the time of the last follow-up visit, whereas no such events had occurred among the 40 patients without occult disease. This difference between the 11 patients with micrometastases and the 40 without micrometastases was not statistically significant (P=0.06). Micrometastases and Other Prognostic Variables Table 2. Table 2. Results of Univariate and Multivariate Analyses. We performed a Cox multiple-regression analysis to determine whether the presence of bone marrow micrometastases was a significant predictor of freedom from distant metastases and of overall survival that was independent of age, menopausal status, tumor size, tumor grade, estrogen-receptor status, and lymph-node status. To control for interactions related to systemic treatment, we stratified data according to the use of adjuvant therapy. No independent factor was identified that predicted locoregional recurrence. In contrast, bone marrow micrometastasis, estrogen receptors, and lymph-node metastasis were each independent predictors of both recurrence with distant metastases and cancer-related death (Table 2). On multivariate analysis, the effects of all risk factors decreased markedly, except for the effect of the presence of occult metastatic disease (Table 2).
Discussion|In this study of the hematogenous dissemination of breast-cancer cells, we used a monoclonal antibody (A45-B/B3) that binds to an antigen on cytokeratins 8, 18, and 19. These cytokeratins are expressed by normal and transformed epithelial cells23,27 but not bone marrow cells.16,17 As compared with antibod-ies against single members of the cytokeratin family, A45-B/B3 is more sensitive,16,17 perhaps in part because of the down-regulation of individual cytokeratin polypeptides in some transformed cells.28 The finding of multiple tumor-specific chromosomal aberrations in cytokeratin-positive cells in bone marrow is strong evidence that our method detects micrometastases.21,29  The controversy over the prognostic relevance of the presence or absence of cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow9-11,19,30-33 may be explained by the use of different antibodies, staining techniques, and criteria for defining positively stained cells. The absence of detectable cytokeratin-positive cells in 189 of 191 specimens from control patients with nonmalignant disease in our study (with all analyses performed in a blinded fashion) demonstrates the specificity of A45-B/B3. The two positive results may have been caused by staining of plasmacytoid cells,34 or they may reflect the presence of an occult malignant tumor.14 The specificity of cytokeratin as a marker of epithelial cancer cells seems clear,35 but there remains the problem of the sampling error inherent in examinations of small volumes of aspirated bone marrow. The exclusion of samples with less than the median number of tumor cells (e.g., 3 tumor cells per 2×106 marrow cells) from our analysis did not change the statistical significance of our findings. Moreover, in vitro experiments showed that our assay reproducibly detected a single tumor cell among 1 million bone marrow cells (unpublished data). In this study, we examined a median of 2 million marrow cells from each patient. The shortcomings of current tumor-staging practices are revealed by the facts that distant metasta-ses eventually occur in up to 30 percent of patients with node-negative cancer36 and that approximately 40 percent of patients with node-positive cancer survive for 10 years or more.37,38 Ménard et al. reported that the presence of lymph-node metastases was not a reliable prognostic indicator in biologically defined subgroups of patients,39 suggesting that lymph-node metastases are not necessarily associated with hematogenous spread of cancer. After four years of follow-up, we found that the presence of occult micrometastases in the marrow was associated with a statistically significant reduction in overall survival. Among patients without such micrometastases, overall survival at four years was 93 percent, whereas among patients with one or more cytokeratin-positive micrometastatic cells, it was 68 percent. This association with overall survival was observed in patients with lymph-node metastases and in those without them, as well as in patients who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. The effect of the presence of occult micrometastases was especially clear among patients with node-negative cancer, whose overall survival was similar to that of patients with node-positive cancer who did not have micrometastases. Moreover, the presence of cytokeratin-positive cells in bone marrow was associated with a significantly higher risk of distant metastases but not of locoregional recurrences. In particular, skeletal relapse was strongly related to the presence of micrometastases, suggesting that precursor cells of overt metastases may indeed be present among the dispersed cytokeratin-positive cells we detected in the marrow at the time of diagnosis. Whether patients with bone marrow micrometastases respond differently to adjuvant chemotherapy than patients without micrometastases remains to be studied. However, we have previously demonstrated that the proliferation rate of micrometastases (which might influence their sensitivity to chemotherapy) appears to be rather low.40 In addition, micrometastases in bone marrow are frequently found after chemotherapy, and their presence increases the risk of relapse.41 Because 245 of the 301 patients with node-negative cancer in our study did not receive systemic adjuvant therapy, the influence of occult metastatic cells on prognosis could be assessed independently of such therapy. We believe that the risk of relapse among patients with node-negative cancer who have bone marrow micrometastases may be sufficiently high to warrant the administration of adjuvant chemotherapy. Our findings support the view of Fisher and colleagues,42 who maintained that different pathways of tumor-cell dissemination cause distinct patterns of metastasis. In line with this reasoning are the results of immunohistochemical studies of lymph nodes of patients presumed to have node-negative breast cancer43,44; these studies found no concordance between the presence of lymph-node metastasis and the presence of bone marrow micrometastases. Analysis of the different metastatic routes that independently predict clinical relapse may provide complementary prognostic information. Two recent studies have shown that the long latency period between diagnosis and relapse in patients with breast cancer, even in those with node-positive cancer, may signal the need to monitor these patients for 10 to 15 years to assess the influence of occult metastatic cells on survival.37,38 For this reason, we caution against the overinterpretation of our data, especially in the case of patients with node-negative cancer who have occult metastatic cells, since we have only four years of follow-up data available. Nevertheless, the finding of such cells far from the primary tumor should alert the physician to the possibility of a subsequent relapse. Whether cytokeratin-positive cells in the marrow are really precursors of metastasis may be answered in the future by genomic studies of single cells or by analyses involving gene profiling.21 With respect to therapeutic strategies whose aim is to prevent metastatic disease, the detection of bone marrow micrometastases may become a useful means of stratifying risk in the heterogeneous group of patients with node-negative breast cancer.
Abstract|Children and adults exposed to chronic interpersonal trauma consistently demonstrate psychological disturbances that are not captured in the posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) diagnosis. The DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) Field Trial studied 400 treatment-seeking traumatized individuals and 128 community residents and found that victims of prolonged interpersonal trauma, particularly trauma early in the life cycle, had a high incidence of problems with (a) regulation of affect and impulses, (b) memory and attention, (c) self-perception, (d) interpersonal relations, (e) somatization, and (f) systems of meaning. This raises important issues about the categorical versus the dimensional nature of posttraumatic stress, as well as the issue of comorbidity in PTSD. These data invite further exploration of what constitutes effective treatment of the full spectrum of posttraumatic psychopathology.
Abstract|Purpose of review:
      
    

    
      The aim of this article is to review the current literature on co-occuring posttraumatic stress disorder and substance-use disorder, with an emphasis on clinical aspects and emerging treatments.
    

    
  


        Recent findings:
      
    

    
      In clinical populations (focusing on either disorder), about 25-50% have a lifetime dual diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder and substance-use disorder. Patients with both disorders have a more severe clinical profile than those with either disorder alone, lower functioning, poorer well being, and worse outcomes across a variety of measures. In recent years, several promising treatment programs have been developed specifically for co-occuring posttraumatic stress disorder and substance-use disorder, with one model having been established as effective thus far.
    

    
  


        Summary:
      
    

    
      Comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder/substance-use disorder is a frequent diagnosis in clinical populations that severely affects course and outcome. Treatment approaches appropriate for this vulnerable population need to be evaluated further and implemented in routine practice.
SARS-CoV-2 and ACE2|Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a membrane-bound aminopeptidase that has a vital role in the cardiovascular and immune systems4. ACE2 is involved in heart function and the development of hypertension and diabetes mellitus. In addition, ACE2 has been identified as a functional receptor for coronaviruses4, including SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. SARS-CoV-2 infection is triggered by binding of the spike protein of the virus to ACE2, which is highly expressed in the heart and lungs4. SARS-CoV-2 mainly invades alveolar epithelial cells, resulting in respiratory symptoms. These symptoms are more severe in patients with CVD, which might be associated with increased secretion of ACE2 in these patients compared with healthy individuals. ACE2 levels can be increased by the use of renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system inhibitors. Given that ACE2 is a functional receptor for SARS-CoV-2, the safety and potential effects of antihypertension therapy with ACE inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers in patients with COVID-19 should be carefully considered. Whether patients with COVID-19 and hypertension who are taking an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin-receptor blocker should switch to another antihypertensive drug remains controversial, and further evidence is required.
Acute cardiac injury|Reports suggest that the Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV) can cause acute myocarditis and heart failure5. SARS-CoV-2 and MERS-CoV have similar pathogenicity, and the myocardial damage caused by infection with these viruses undoubtedly increases the difficulty and complexity of patient treatment. Myocardial injury associated with the SARS-CoV-2 occurred in 5 of the first 41 patients diagnosed with COVID-19 in Wuhan, which mainly manifested as an increase in high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I (hs-cTnI) levels (>28 pg/ml)3. In this study, four of five patients with myocardial injury were admitted to the intensive-care unit (ICU), which indicates the serious nature of the myocardial injury in patients with COVID-19. Blood-pressure levels were significantly higher in patients treated in the ICU than in those not treated in the ICU (mean systolic blood pressure 145 mmHg versus 122 mmHg; P < 0.001)3. In another report of 138 patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, 36 patients with severe symptoms were treated in the ICU1. The levels of biomarkers of myocardial injury were significantly higher in patients treated in the ICU than in those not treated in the ICU (median creatine kinase (CK)-MB level 18 U/l versus 14 U/l, P < 0.001; hs-cTnI level 11.0 pg/ml versus 5.1 pg/ml, P = 0.004), suggesting that patients with severe symptoms often have complications involving acute myocardial injury1. In addition, among the confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection reported by the National Health Commission of China (NHC), some of the patients first went to see a doctor because of cardiovascular symptoms. The patients presented with heart palpitations and chest tightness rather than with respiratory symptoms, such as fever and cough, but were later diagnosed with COVID-19. Among the people who died from COVID-19 reported by the NHC, 11.8% of patients without underlying CVD had substantial heart damage, with elevated levels of cTnI or cardiac arrest during hospitalization. Therefore, in patients with COVID-19, the incidence of cardiovascular symptoms is high, owing to the systemic inflammatory response and immune system disorders during disease progression.The mechanism of acute myocardial injury caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection might be related to ACE2. ACE2 is widely expressed not only in the lungs but also in the cardiovascular system and, therefore, ACE2-related signalling pathways might also have a role in heart injury. Other proposed mechanisms of myocardial injury include a cytokine storm triggered by an imbalanced response by type 1 and type 2 T helper cells3,6, and respiratory dysfunction and hypoxaemia caused by COVID-19, resulting in damage to myocardial cells.
Chronic cardiovascular damage|A 12-year follow-up survey of 25 patients who recovered from SARS-CoV infection found that 68% had hyperlipidaemia, 44% had cardiovascular system abnormalities and 60% had glucose metabolism disorders7. Metabolomics analysis revealed that lipid metabolism was dysregulated in patients with a history of SARS-CoV infection. In these patients, the serum concentrations of free fatty acids, lysophosphatidylcholine, lysophosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylglycerol were significantly increased compared with individuals without a history of SARS-CoV infection7. However, the mechanisms by which SARS-CoV infection leads to disorders of lipid and glucose metabolism are still uncertain. Given that SARS-CoV-2 has a similar structure to SARS-CoV, this novel virus might also cause chronic damage to the cardiovascular system, and attention should be given to cardiovascular protection during treatment for COVID-19.
Patients with pre-existing CVD|A meta-analysis showed that MERS-CoV infection was more likely to occur in patients with underlying CVD8. In patients with MERS-CoV infection and severe symptoms, 50% had hypertension and diabetes and up to 30% had heart disease. Similarly, according to the Pneumonitis Diagnosis and Treatment Program for New Coronavirus Infection (Trial Version 4), elderly people with comorbidities are more likely to be infected with SARS-CoV-2, especially those with hypertension, coronary heart disease or diabetes. Furthermore, patients with CVD are more likely to develop severe symptoms if infected with SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, patients with CVD account for a large proportion of deaths from COVID-19. In one study, among the patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19, 58% had hypertension, 25% had heart disease and 44% had arrhythmia1. According to mortality data released by the NHC, 35% of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection had a history of hypertension and 17% had a history of coronary heart disease. Furthermore, data show that patients aged >60 years who were infected with SARS-CoV-2 had more systemic symptoms and more severe pneumonia than patients aged ≤60 years9. Therefore, in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, underlying CVD can aggravate the pneumonia and increase the severity of symptoms.Patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) who are infected with SARS-CoV-2 often have a poor prognosis. In patients with ACS, cardiac functional reserve can be reduced owing to myocardial ischaemia or necrosis. When infected with SARS-CoV-2, cardiac insufficiency is more likely to occur, leading to a sudden deterioration in the condition of these patients. Some of the patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan had previous ACS, which was associated with severe illness and high mortality. For patients with cardiac insufficiency who have underlying heart disease, SARS-CoV-2 infection might act as a precipitating factor to worsen the condition and lead to death.Drug-related heart damage during COVID-19 treatment is a concern. In particular, the use of antiviral drugs should be monitored. In a study of 138 patients with COVID-19, 89.9% were given antiviral drugs1. However, many antiviral drugs can cause cardiac insufficiency, arrhythmia or other cardiovascular disorders. Therefore, during treatment of COVID-19, especially with the use of antivirals, the risk of cardiac toxicity must be closely monitored10.
Conclusions|SARS-CoV-2 is thought to infect host cells through ACE2 to cause COVID-19, while also causing damage to the myocardium, although the specific mechanisms are uncertain. Patients with underlying CVD and SARS-CoV-2 infection have an adverse prognosis. Therefore, particular attention should be given to cardiovascular protection during treatment for COVID-19.
Author information|
Ethics declarations|ffiliationsDepartment of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, ChinaYing-Ying Zheng & Jin-Ying ZhangKey Laboratory of Cardiac Injury and Repair of Henan Province, Zhengzhou, ChinaYing-Ying Zheng & Jin-Ying ZhangDepartment of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, ChinaYi-Tong Ma & Xiang XieAuthorsYing-Ying ZhengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarYi-Tong MaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJin-Ying ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarXiang XieView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarCorresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Yi-Tong Ma or Jin-Ying Zhang or Xiang Xie.
Additional information|mpeting interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Rights and permissions|Related link
Pneumonitis Diagnosis and Treatment Program for New Coronavirus Infection:
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2020-01/28/content_5472673.htm

About this article|ionsReprints and Permissions
Further reading|cleCite this articleZheng, Y., Ma, Y., Zhang, J. et al. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular system.
                    Nat Rev Cardiol 17, 259–260 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-020-0360-5Download citationPublished: 05 March 2020Issue Date: May 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-020-0360-5
Abstract|Somatic mutations in cancer genomes are caused by multiple mutational processes, each of which generates a characteristic mutational signature1. Here, as part of the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) Consortium2 of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we characterized mutational signatures using 84,729,690 somatic mutations from 4,645 whole-genome and 19,184 exome sequences that encompass most types of cancer. We identified 49 single-base-substitution, 11 doublet-base-substitution, 4 clustered-base-substitution and 17 small insertion-and-deletion signatures. The substantial size of our dataset, compared with previous analyses3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15, enabled the discovery of new signatures, the separation of overlapping signatures and the decomposition of signatures into components that may represent associated—but distinct—DNA damage, repair and/or replication mechanisms. By estimating the contribution of each signature to the mutational catalogues of individual cancer genomes, we revealed associations of signatures to exogenous or endogenous exposures, as well as to defective DNA-maintenance processes. However, many signatures are of unknown cause. This analysis provides a systematic perspective on the repertoire of mutational processes that contribute to the development of human cancer.
Main|Somatic mutations in cancer genomes are caused by mutational processes of both exogenous and endogenous origin that operate during the cell lineage between the fertilized egg and the cancer cell16. Each mutational process may involve components of DNA damage or modification, DNA repair and DNA replication (which may be normal or abnormal), and generates a characteristic mutational signature that potentially includes base substitutions, small insertions and deletions (indels), genome rearrangements and chromosome copy-number changes1. The mutations in an individual cancer genome may have been generated by multiple mutational processes, and thus incorporate multiple superimposed mutational signatures. Therefore, to systematically characterize the mutational processes that contribute to cancer, mathematical methods have previously been used to decipher mutational signatures from somatic mutation catalogues, estimate the number of mutations that are attributable to each signature in individual samples and annotate each mutation class in each tumour with the probability that it arose from each signature6,9,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27.Previous studies of multiple types of cancer have identified more than 30 single-base substitution (SBS) signatures, some of known—but many of unknown—aetiologies, some ubiquitous and others rare, some part of normal cell biology and others associated with abnormal exposures or neoplastic progression3,4,5,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15. Genome rearrangement signatures have also previously been described11,25,28,29,30. However, the analysis of other classes of mutation has been relatively limited3,11,31,32,33.Mutational signature analysis has predominantly used cancer exome sequences. However, the many-fold-greater numbers of somatic mutations in whole genomes provide substantially increased power for signature decomposition, enabling the better separation of partially correlated signatures and the extraction of signatures that contribute relatively small numbers of mutations. Furthermore, technical artefacts and differences in sequencing technologies and mutation-calling algorithms can themselves generate mutational signatures. Therefore, the uniformly processed and highly curated sets of all classes of somatic mutations from the 2,780 cancer genomes of the PCAWG project2, combined with most other suitable cancer genomes (accession code syn11801889, available at https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn11801889), present a notable opportunity to establish the repertoire of mutational signatures and determine their activities across different types of cancer. The timing of these signatures during the evolution of individual cancers and the repertoire of signatures of structural variation have been explored in other PCAWG analyses30,34.
Mutational signature analysis|The 23,829 samples—which include most types of cancer, and comprise the 2,780 PCAWG whole genomes2, 1,865 additional whole genomes and 19,184 exomes—yielded 79,793,266 somatic SBSs, 814,191 doublet-base substitutions (DBSs) and 4,122,233 small indels that were analysed for mutational signatures, about 10-fold-more mutations than any previous study of which we are aware (syn11801889)6.We developed classifications for each type of mutation. For SBSs, the primary classification comprised 96 classes (available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/SBS) constituted by the 6 base substitutions C>A, C>G, C>T, T>A, T>C and T>G (in which the mutated base is represented by the pyrimidine of the base pair), plus the flanking 5′ and 3′ bases. In some analyses, two flanking bases 5′ and 3′ to the mutated base were considered (producing 1,536 classes) or mutations within transcribed genome regions were selected and classified according to whether the mutated pyrimidine fell on the transcribed or untranscribed strand (producing 192 classes). We also derived a classification for DBSs (78 classes; available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/DBS). Indels were classified as deletions or insertions and—when of a single base—as C or T, and according to the length of the mononucleotide repeat tract in which they occurred. Longer indels were classified as occurring at repeats or with overlapping microhomology at deletion boundaries, and according to the size of indel, repeat and microhomology (83 classes; available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/ID).The PCAWG whole-genome sequences, the additional whole-genome sequences and the exome sequences were each analysed separately (syn11801889)2. Signatures were extracted from each type of cancer individually, from all cancer types together, as separate SBS, DBS and indel signatures, and as composite signatures of all three types of mutation (Supplementary Note 2).We used two methods based on nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF): SigProfiler, an elaborated version of the framework used for the previous ‘Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer’ (COSMIC) compendium of mutational signatures (COSMIC v.2, available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures_v2)11,17, and SignatureAnalyzer, which is based on a Bayesian variant of NMF9,27,35. NMF determines the signature profiles and contributions of each signature to each cancer genome as part of its factorization of the input matrix of mutation spectra. However, with many signatures and/or heterogeneous mutation burdens across samples, the mutations observed in a particular sample can be reconstructed in multiple ways—often with small and/or biologically implausible contributions from many signatures. Therefore, each method has developed a separate procedure for estimating the contributions of signatures to each sample (Methods).We tested SignatureAnalyzer and SigProfiler on 11 sets of synthetic data (including 64,400 synthetic samples), generated from known signature profiles (Methods, Supplementary Note 2). Both methods performed well in re-extracting known signatures from realistically complex data. Extracted signatures that were discordant from the known input usually arose from difficulties in selecting the correct number of signatures. The results confirm that use of NMF-based approaches for extracting mutational signatures is not a purely algorithmic process, but also requires consideration of evidence from experimentally determined mutational signatures and the DNA damage and repair literature, prior evidence of biological plausibility and human-guided sensitivity analysis confirming that extractions from different groupings of tumours yield consistent results. We used these types of evidence and approaches in determining the signature profiles reported here. The findings are consistent with results regarding NMF, and the related areas of probabilistic topic modelling and latent Dirichlet allocation, in multiple problem domains36,37. It is widely understood that the choice of the number of latent variables (for our purposes, the number of mutational signatures) is rarely amenable to complete automation.The results from our SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer analyses of cancer data exhibited many similarities, and we assigned the same identifiers to similar signatures extracted using the two methods (syn12016215). However, there were also noteworthy differences. The numbers of SBS signatures found in PCAWG tumours with a low mutation burden (94.4% of cases that contain 47% of mutations) were similar: 31 using SigProfiler and 35 using SignatureAnalyzer. However, the numbers of additional SBS signatures extracted from hypermutated PCAWG samples (5.6% of cases, containing 53% of mutations) were different: 13 using SigProfiler and 25 using SignatureAnalyzer. There were also differences in SBS signature profiles, including among signatures found in cases with a low mutation burden. The latter primarily involved relatively featureless (‘flat’) signatures, which are mathematically challenging to deconvolute. Finally, there were differences in signature attributions to individual samples. SignatureAnalyzer used more signatures to reconstruct the mutational profiles (Extended Data Fig. 1) (syn12169204 and syn12177011) and attributions to flat signatures were different (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b) (syn12169204). The DBS and indel signatures were generally similar between the two methods (Extended Data Fig. 2c, d).The final reference mutational signatures were determined from the PCAWG set, supplemented by additional signatures from the other datasets (COSMIC, available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures). Each signature was allocated an identifier consistent with, and extending, the COSMIC v.2 annotation. Some previous signatures split into multiple constituent signatures: these were numbered as in the previous annotation, but with additional letter suffixes (for example, SBS17 was split into SBS17a and SBS17b). DNA sequencing and analysis artefacts also generate mutational signatures. We indicate which signatures are possible artefacts but do not present them below (full information is available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures). The results of both SignatureAnalyzer and SigProfiler were used throughout the study. However, for brevity and for continuity with the signature set previously displayed in COSMIC v.2—which has been widely used as a reference—SigProfiler results are outlined here, and SignatureAnalyzer results are provided in Extended Data Figs. 3, 4 and at syn11738307.
Single-base substitution signatures|There were substantial differences in the numbers of SBSs between samples (ranging from hundreds to millions) and between cancer types38 (Fig. 1). In total, 67 SBS mutational signatures were extracted, of which 49 were considered likely to be of biological origin (Fig. 2, Methods; available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/SBS/). Except for signature SBS25, all signatures reported in COSMIC v.2 (ref. 6) were confirmed; the median cosine similarity between the newly derived signatures and those on COSMIC v.2 was 0.95, excluding the ‘split’ signatures (discussed below). SBS25 was previously found in cell lines derived from Hodgkin lymphomas treated with chemotherapy, and no primary cancers of this type were available. The newly derived signatures showed much improved separation from each other and more-distinct signature profiles, as compared with COSMIC v.2 signatures (see ‘Better separation compared to COSMIC v.2 signatures’ in Supplementary Note 2 for more information).Fig. 1: Mutation burdens of SBSs, DBSs and small indels  across PCAWG tumour types.The numbers of cases of each tumour type are shown next to the labels. Each dot represents one tumour. Tumour types are ordered by the median numbers of single-base substitutions. Only tumour types with >20 samples are shown. AdenoCA, adenocarcinoma; BNHL, B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma; ChRCC, chromophobe renal cell carcinoma; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; CNS, central nervous system; ColoRect, colorectal; Eso, oesophageal; GBM, glioblastoma; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; Medullo, medulloblastoma; MH, microhomology; MPN, myeloproliferative neoplasm; Osteosarc, osteosarcoma; Panc, pancreatic; PiloAstro, pilocytic astrocytoma; Prost; prostate; RCC, renal cell carcinoma; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma; TCC, transitional cell carcinoma; Thy, thyroid.Full size imageFig. 2: Profiles of SBS, DBS and small indel mutational signatures.The classifications of each mutation type (SBS, 96 classes; DBS, 78 classes; and indels, 83 classes) are described in the main text. Magnified versions of signatures SBS4, DBS2 and ID3 (all of which are associated with tobacco smoking) are shown to illustrate the positions of each mutation subtype on each plot. The plotted data are available in digital form (along with the x axis labels) at syn12025148.Full size imageThirteen of the SBS signatures we extracted (excluding those due to signature splitting) represent newly identified and probably real signatures, not present in COSMIC v.2. Some were rare (SBS31, SBS32, SBS35, SBS36, SBS42 and SBS44). Others were more common, but contributed relatively few mutations and/or were similar to previously discovered signatures (SBS38, SBS39 and SBS40). Notably, SBS40 is a flat signature similar to SBS5. It contributes to multiple types of cancer, but its similarity to SBS5 renders the extent of this contribution uncertain. For some of the newly identified signatures, there were plausible underlying aetiologies (Fig. 3, Extended Data Figs. 4, 5): for SBS31 and SBS35, platinum compound chemotherapy39; for SBS32, azathioprine therapy; for SBS36, inactivating germline or somatic mutations in MUTYH (which encodes a component of the base excision repair machinery)40,41; for SBS38, additional effects of exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light; for SBS42, occupational exposure to haloalkanes13; and for SBS44, defective DNA mismatch repair42.Fig. 3: The number of mutations contributed by each mutational signature to the PCAWG tumours.The size of each dot represents the proportion of samples of each tumour type that shows the mutational signature. The colour of each dot represents the median mutation burden of the signature in samples that show the signature. Tumours that had few mutations or that were poorly reconstructed by the signature assignment were excluded. The contributions of composite signatures to the PCAWG cancers, and SBS signatures to the complete set of cancer samples analysed, are shown in Extended Data Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; liposarc, liposarcoma; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome.Full size imageThree previously characterized base substitution signatures (SBS7, SBS10 and SBS17) split into multiple constituent signatures (Fig. 2). Signature splitting probably reflects the existence of multiple distinct mutational processes initiated by the same exposure that have closely—but not perfectly—correlated activities. We previously regarded SBS7 as a single signature composed predominantly of C>T at CCN and TCN trinucleotides (the mutated base is underlined) together with many fewer T>N mutations. It was found in malignant melanomas and squamous skin carcinomas, and is probably due to the UV-light-induced formation of pyrimidine dimers, followed by translesion DNA synthesis by error-prone polymerases predominantly inserting A opposite to damaged cytosines. SBS7 has now been decomposed into four constituent signatures. SBS7a and SBS7b (consisting mainly of C>T at TCN and C>T at CCN, respectively) may reflect different pyrimidine-dimer photoproducts. SBS7c and SBS7d (consisting predominantly of T>A at NTT and T>C at NTT, respectively43) may be due to low frequencies of the misincorporation of T and G opposite to thymines in pyrimidine dimers. The splitting of SBS10 and SBS17 is described at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/SBS/.Several base substitution signatures showed transcriptional strand bias, which may be attributable to transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair acting on DNA damage and/or to an excess of DNA damage on untranscribed strands of genes44. Both mechanisms result in more mutations of damaged bases on untranscribed than on transcribed strands of genes. Assuming that either mechanism is responsible for the observed transcriptional strand biases, DNA damage to cytosine (SBS7a and SBS7b), guanine (SBS4, SBS8, SBS19, SBS23, SBS24, SBS31, SBS32, SBS35 and SBS42), thymine (SBS7c, SBS7d, SBS21, SBS26 and SBS33) and adenine (SBS5, SBS12, SBS16, SBS22 and SBS25) may underlie these mutational signatures (plots of strand bias are available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/SBS/). The likely DNA-damaging agents are known for SBS4 (tobacco mutagens), SBS7a, SBS7b, SBS7c and SBS7d (UV light), SBS22 (aristolochic acid), SBS24 (aflatoxin), SBS25 (chemotherapy), SBS31 and SBS35 (platinum compounds), SBS32 (azathioprine) and SBS42 (haloalkanes).Using the SBS classification of 1,536 mutation types, which uses the sequence context two bases 5′ and two bases 3′ to each mutated base, yielded signatures that are largely consistent with those based on substitutions in trinucleotide contexts. Notably, however, two forms of both SBS2 and SBS13 were extracted, one with mainly a pyrimidine and the other with mainly a purine at the −2 base (the second base 5′ to the mutated cytosine). These may represent the activities of the cytidine deaminases APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B, respectively45. If so, APOBEC3A accounts for many more mutations than APOBEC3B in cancers with high APOBEC activity. Other signatures showed nonrandom sequence contexts at +2 and −2 positions (for example, SBS17a, SBS17b and SBS9), but sequence context effects were generally much stronger for bases immediately 5′ and 3′ to mutated bases.SBS signatures showed substantial variation in the numbers of cancer types and cancer samples in which they were found, and in the mutations attributed per cancer sample (Fig. 3). Almost all individual cancer samples exhibited multiple signatures, with a mode of three in the PCAWG set (syn12169204). The assigned signatures reconstruct well the mutational spectra of the cancer samples (in PCAWG samples, the median cosine similarity was 0.97; 96.3% of samples with cosine similarity >0.90): Fig. 4 shows illustrative examples.Fig. 4: Illustrative examples of mutational spectra of individual cancer samples.The contributory SBS, DBS and small indel mutational signatures in two tumours are shown.Full size imageSome mutational processes generate base substitutions that cluster in small genomic regions. The limited numbers of such mutations may result in a failure to detect their signatures using standard methods. We therefore identified clustered mutations in each genome and analysed them separately (Methods). Four main clustered mutational signatures were identified (Fig. 2), as previously reported4,27,32. Two, which are found in multiple types of cancer, were similar to SBS2 and SBS13 (which have been attributed to APOBEC enzyme activity) and represent foci of kataegis3,32,46. Two further clustered signatures, one characterized by C>T and C>G mutations at (A or G)C(C or T) trinucleotides47 and the other T>A and T>C mutations at (A or T)T(A or T), were found in lymphoid neoplasms; they probably represent the direct and indirect consequences of activation-induced cytidine deaminase mutagenesis and translesion DNA synthesis by error-prone polymerases (SBS84 and SBS85, respectively)27.
Doublet-base substitution signatures|Tandem doublet, triplet, quadruplet, quintuplet and sextuplet base substitutions (syn11801938 and syn11726620) were observed at about 1% the prevalence of SBSs. In most cancer genomes, the number of DBSs was considerably higher than would be expected from the random adjacency of SBSs (syn12177057), indicating the existence of commonly occurring, single mutagenic events that cause substitutions at neighbouring bases. There was substantial variation in the number of DBSs, ranging from 0 to 20,818 in a sample. The numbers of DBSs were generally proportional to the numbers of SBSs (Fig. 1), although colorectal adenocarcinomas had fewer than expected, and lung cancers and melanomas had more (Extended Data Table 1). We extracted eleven DBS signatures (Fig. 2, of which three have previously been reported33,48.Signature DBS1 was characterized by CC>TT mutations (Fig. 2), contributed hundreds to tens of thousands of mutations in malignant melanomas with SBS7a and SBS7b (Fig. 3), exhibited transcriptional strand bias consistent with damage to cytosines (syn12177063) and is a known consequence of DNA damage induced by UV light33,49. Excluding cancers associated with exposure to UV light also yielded a signature (DBS11) that was characterized predominantly by CC>TT mutations, but only contributing tens of mutations in many samples from multiple types of cancer (Figs. 2, 3). DBS11 was associated with SBS2, which is due to APOBEC activity: APOBEC activity may, therefore, also generate DBS11.DBS2 was composed predominantly of CC>AA mutations, with smaller numbers of CC>AG and CC>AT mutations, and contributed hundreds to thousands of mutations in lung adenocarcinoma, lung squamous and head and neck squamous carcinomas, which are often caused by tobacco smoking33 (Figs. 2, 3). DBS2 showed transcriptional strand bias indicative of guanine damage (syn12177064) and was associated with SBS4, which is caused by exposure to tobacco smoke. It is likely, therefore, that DBS2 can be a consequence of DNA damage by tobacco-smoke mutagens.A signature similar to DBS2 contributed hundreds of mutations to liver cancers and tens of mutations to other types of cancer without evidence of exposure to tobacco smoke. A pattern resembling DBS2 also dominates DBSs in healthy mouse cells50. The nature of the mutational processes that underlie these signatures in human cancers that are unrelated to smoking, and in healthy mice, is unknown. However, in experimental systems, acetaldehyde exposure has been shown to generate a mutational signature characterized primarily by CC>AA mutations, and lower burdens of CC>AG and CC>AT mutations, together with C>A SBSs48. Acetaldehyde is an oxidation product of alcohol and a constituent of cigarette smoke. The role of acetaldehyde, and perhaps other aldehydes, in generating DBS2 merits further investigation51.DBS3, DBS7, DBS8 and DBS10 showed hundreds to thousands of mutations in rare colorectal, stomach and oesophageal cancers, some of which showed evidence of defective DNA mismatch repair (DBS7 and DBS10) or polymerase epsilon exonuclease domain mutations (DBS3) that generate hypermutator phenotypes (Figs. 2, 3). DBS5 was found in cancers exposed to platinum chemotherapy, and is associated with SBS31 and SBS35.
Small insertion-and-deletion signatures|Indels were usually present at about 10% of the frequency of base substitutions (Fig. 1). There was substantial variation between cancer genomes in the number of indels, even when cancers with evidence of defective DNA mismatch repair were excluded. Overall, the numbers of deletions and insertions were similar, but there was variation between cancer types: some cancers showed more deletions and others more insertions of various subtypes (Fig. 1). We extracted 17 indel mutational signatures (Fig. 2).Indel signature 1 (ID1) was composed predominantly of insertions of thymine and ID2 was composed predominantly of deletions of thymine, both at long (≥5) thymine mononucleotide repeats (Fig. 2). Tens to hundreds of mutations of both signatures were found in most samples of most types of cancer, but were particularly common in colorectal, stomach, endometrial and oesophageal cancers and in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (Fig. 3). Together, ID1 and ID2 accounted for 97% and 45% of indels in hypermutated and non-hypermutated cancer genomes, respectively (Extended Data Table 2). They are probably due to slippage of either the nascent (ID1) or template strand (ID2) during DNA replication of long mononucleotide tracts.ID3 was characterized predominantly by deletions of cytosine at short (≤5-bp long) mononucleotide cytosine repeats and exhibited hundreds of mutations in cancers of the lung, head and neck that are associated with tobacco smoking (Figs. 2, 3). There was transcriptional strand bias of mutations, with more guanine deletions than cytosine deletions on the untranscribed strands of genes, which is compatible with transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair of damaged guanine (syn12177065 and syn12177066). The numbers of ID3 mutations positively correlated with the numbers of SBS4 and DBS2 mutations, which we have shown are associated with tobacco smoking (Extended Data Figs. 6, 7). Thus, DNA damage by components of tobacco smoke probably underlie ID3.ID13 was characterized predominantly by deletions of thymine at thymine–thymine dinucleotides and exhibited large numbers of mutations in malignant melanomas of the skin (Figs. 2, 3). The numbers of ID13 mutations correlated with the numbers of SBS7a, SBS7b and DBS1 mutations, which we have attributed to DNA damage induced by UV light (Extended Data Figs. 6, 7). However, deletions of cytosine at cytosine–cytosine dinucleotides did not feature strongly in ID13, which may reflect the predominance of thymine compared to cytosine dimers induced by UV light52.ID6 and ID8 were both characterized predominantly by ≥5-bp deletions (Fig. 2). ID6 exhibited overlapping microhomology at deletion boundaries with a mode of 2 bp (and often longer stretches) and correlated with SBS3, which we have attributed to defective homologous-recombination-based repair (Extended Data Figs. 6, 7). By contrast, ID8 deletions showed shorter or no microhomology at deletion boundaries and did not strongly correlate with SBS3. Both deletion patterns may be characteristic of DNA double-strand-break repair by non-homologous-recombination-based end-joining mechanisms and—if so—this suggests that at least two distinct forms are operative in human cancer53.A small fraction of cancers exhibited very large numbers of ID1 and ID2 mutations (>10,000) (Fig. 3) (shown at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/ID). These were usually accompanied by SBS6, SBS14, SBS15, SBS20, SBS21, SBS26 and/or SBS44, which are associated with deficiency in DNA mismatch repair—sometimes combined with POLE or POLD1 proofreading deficiency (SBS14 and SBS20)35. Occasional cases with these signatures additionally showed large numbers of indels attributed to ID7 (syn11738668), and rare samples showed large numbers of ID4, ID11, ID14, ID15, ID16 or ID17 mutations but did not show large numbers of ID1 and ID2 mutations or the SBS signatures associated with deficiency in DNA mismatch repair.
Correlations with age|A positive correlation between age of cancer diagnosis and the number of mutations attributable to a signature suggests that the underlying mutational process has been operative (at a more or less constant rate) throughout the cell lineage from fertilized egg to cancer cell, and thus in the normal cells from which that type of cancer develops6,54. Confirming previous reports6,54, the numbers of SBS1 and SBS5 mutations correlate with age, and exhibit different rates in different types of tissue (q values provided in syn12030687, syn20317940 and syn12217988). SBS40 also correlated with age in multiple types of cancer, although—given its similarity to SBS5—misattribution cannot be excluded. DBS2 and DBS4 correlated with age; consistent with activity in normal cells and, when combined their profiles closely resemble the spectrum of DBS mutations found in normal mouse cells50. ID1, ID2, ID5 and ID8 showed correlations with age in multiple tissues. ID1 and ID2 indels are probably due to slippage at poly T repeats during DNA replication and correlated with the numbers of SBS1 substitutions, which have previously been proposed to reflect the number of mitoses a cell has experienced6. Thus, SBS1, ID1 and ID2 may all be generated during DNA replication at mitosis. The number of ID5 mutations correlated with the number of SBS40 mutations, and the mutational processes that underlie these two age-correlated signatures may therefore contain common components. ID8, which is predominantly composed of ≥5-bp deletions with no or 1 bp of microhomology at their boundaries, is probably due to DNA double-strand breaks repaired by a non-homologous-end-joining mechanism. The results indicate that multiple mutational processes operate in normal cells.
Discussion|There are important constraints, limitations and assumptions in the analytic frameworks used here to characterize mutational signatures. Signatures extracted from sample sets in which multiple processes are operative remain mathematical approximations, with profiles that are potentially influenced by the mathematical approach used and other factors. For conceptual and practical simplicity, we assume that a single signature is associated with each mutational process and provide an average reference signature to represent it. However, we do not discount the possibility that further nuances and variations of signature profiles exist. We have estimated the contributions from each signature to the mutation burden in each sample. However, with increasing numbers of signatures and differences of multiple orders of magnitude in mutation burdens between some signatures, prior knowledge has helped to avoid biologically implausible results. Thus, the further development of methods for deciphering and attributing mutational signatures is warranted, ideally supported by signatures derived from experimental systems in which the causes are known. Nevertheless, signatures with many similarities and some differences can be found by different mathematical approaches, and these can be confirmed in several ways, including experimentally elucidated signatures5,31,39,42,43,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62 and tumours dominated by a single signature (syn12016215).This analysis includes most publicly available exome and whole-genome cancer sequences. Some rare or geographically restricted signatures may not have been captured, signatures conferring limited mutation burdens may have been missed and signatures of therapeutic mutagenic exposures have not been exhaustively explored. Nevertheless, it is likely that a substantial proportion of the naturally occurring mutational signatures found in human cancer have now been described. This comprehensive repertoire provides a foundation for research into the aetiologies of geographical and temporal differences in cancer incidence, the mutational processes that operate in healthy tissues and non-neoplastic disease states, clinical and public health applications of signatures and mechanistic understanding of the mutational processes that underlie carcinogenesis.
Methods|No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.These online methods contain an abridged description of the methodology used in the current manuscript; extensive details about the methodology we used are provided in Supplementary Note 2. Importantly, two independently developed computational frameworks (SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer) based on NMF were applied separately to the examined sets of mutational catalogues. SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer take different approaches for deciphering mutational signatures and for assigning each signature to each sample. By using two methods, we aimed to provide a perspective on the effect that different methodologies can have on the numbers of signatures generated, signature profiles and attributions. In addition to applying SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer to cancer data, the tools were also applied to realistic synthetic data with known solutions.Analysis of mutational signatures with SigProfilerSigProfiler incorporates two distinct steps for identification of mutational signatures, based on the previously described methodology6,11,17 (Extended Data Fig. 8). The first step (SigProfilerExtraction) encompasses a hierarchical de novo extraction of mutational signatures based on somatic mutations and their immediate sequence context, and the second step (SigProfilerAttribution) focuses on accurately estimating the number of somatic mutations associated with each extracted mutational signature in each sample. SigProfilerExtraction is an extension of a previous framework for the analysis of mutational signatures11,17. In brief, for a given set of mutational catalogues, the algorithm deciphers a minimal set of mutational signatures that optimally explains the proportion of each mutation type and estimates the contribution of each signature to each sample. More specifically, for each NMF iteration, SigProfilerExtraction minimizes a generalized Kullback–Leibler divergence constrained for nonnegativity (Supplementary Note 2). The algorithm uses multiple NMF iterations (in most cases 1,024) to identify the matrix of mutational signatures and the matrix of the activities of these signatures, as previously described17. The unknown number of signatures is determined by human assessment of the stability and accuracy of solutions for a range of values, as previously described17. The framework is applied hierarchically to increase its ability to find mutational signatures that generate few mutations or are present in few samples.After signatures are discovered by SigProfilerExtraction, SigProfilerAttribution estimates their contributions to individual samples. For each examined sample, the estimation algorithm involves finding the minimum of the Frobenius norm of a constrained function using a nonlinear convex optimization programming solver using the interior-point algorithm63. See Supplementary Note 2 and Extended Data Fig. 8b for further details.Analysis of mutational signatures with SignatureAnalyzerSignatureAnalyzer uses a Bayesian variant of NMF that infers the number of signatures through the automatic relevance determination technique and delivers highly interpretable and sparse representations for both signature profiles and attributions that strike a balance between data fitting and model complexity. Further details of the actual implementation of the computational approach have previously been published9,27,64. SignatureAnalyzer was applied by using a two-step signature extraction strategy using 1,536 pentanucleotide contexts for SBSs, 83 indel features and 78 DBS features. In addition to the separate extraction of SBS, indel and DBS signatures, we performed a ‘COMPOSITE’ signature extraction based on all 1,697 features (1,536 SBS + 78 DBS + 83 indel). For SBSs, the 1,536 SBS COMPOSITE signatures are preferred; for DBSs and indels, the separately extracted signatures are preferred.In step 1 of the two-step extraction process, global signature extraction was performed for the samples with a low mutation burden (n = 2,624). These excluded hypermutated tumours: those with putative polymerase epsilon (POLE) defects or mismatch repair defects (microsatellite instable tumours), skin tumours (which had intense UV-light mutagenesis) and one tumour with temozolomide (TMZ) exposure. Because the underlying algorithm of SignatureAnalyzer performs a stochastic search, different runs can produce different results. In step 1, we ran SignatureAnalyzer 10 times and selected the solution with the highest posterior probability. In step 2, additional signatures unique to hypermutated samples were extracted (again selecting the highest posterior probability over ten runs) while allowing all signatures found in the samples with low mutation burden, to explain some of the spectra of hypermutated samples. This approach was designed to minimize a well-known ‘signature bleeding’ effect or a bias of hyper- or ultramutated samples on the signature extraction. In addition, this approach provided information about which signatures are unique to the hypermutated samples, which was later used when attributing signatures to samples.A similar strategy was used for signature attribution: we performed a separate attribution process for low- and hypermutated samples in all COMPOSITE, SBS, DBS and indel signatures. For downstream analyses, we preferred to use the COMPOSITE attributions for SBSs and the separately calculated attributions for DBSs and indels. Signature attribution in samples with a low mutation burden was performed separately in each tumour type (for example, Biliary–AdenoCA, Bladder–TCC, Bone–Osteosarc, and so on). Attribution was also performed separately in the combined microsatellite instable tumours (n = 39), POLE (n = 9), skin melanoma (n = 107) and TMZ-exposed samples (syn11738314). In both groups, signature availability (which signatures were active, or not) was primarily inferred through the automatic relevance determination process applied to the activity matrix H only, while fixing the signature matrix W. The attribution in samples with a low mutation burden was performed using only signatures found in the step 1 of the signature extraction. Two additional rules were applied in SBS signature attribution to enforce biological plausibility and minimize a signature bleeding: (i) allow SBS4 (smoking signature) only in lung, head and neck cases; and (ii) allow SBS11 (TMZ signature) in a single GBM sample. This was enforced by introducing a binary, signature-by-sample signature indicator matrix Z (1, allowed; 0, not allowed), which was multiplied by the H matrix in every multiplication update of H. No additional rules were applied to indel or DBS signature attributions, except that signatures found in hypermutated samples were not allowed in samples with a low mutation burden.Application of SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer to synthetic dataOur goal was to evaluate SignatureAnalyzer and SigProfiler on realistic synthetic data to identify any potential limitations of these two methods. SignatureAnalyzer and SigProfiler were tested on 11 sets of synthetic data, encompassing a total of 64,400 synthetic samples, in which known signature profiles were used to generate catalogues of synthetic mutational spectra. We operationally defined ‘realistic’ data as those based on the characteristics of either SignatureAnalyzer’s or SigProfiler’s analysis of the PCAWG genome data. SignatureAnalyzer’s reference signature profiles were based on COMPOSITE signatures, consisting of 1,536 types of strand-agnostic SBSs in pentanucleotide context, 78 types of DBSs and 83 types of small indels, for a total of 1,697 mutation types. SigProfiler’s reference analysis was based on strand-agnostic SBSs in the context of one 5′ and one 3′ base. For each test, we generated two sets of realistic data: SigProfiler-realistic (based on SigProfiler’s reference signatures and attributions) and SignatureAnalyzer-realistic (based on SignatureAnalyzer’s reference signatures and attributions), as well as two other types of data that involved using SignatureAnalyzer profiles with SigProfiler attributions and vice versa. A detailed description of each of the 11 sets of synthetic data and the results from applying SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer are provided in Supplementary Note 2.Analysis of clustered mutational signaturesSomatic SBSs were considered clustered if they had intermutational distances < 1,000 bp. More specifically, for each sample, an SBS mutational catalogue was generated for substitutions that were <1,000 bp from another substitution. Subsequently, the set of SBS mutational catalogues containing clustered mutations underwent de novo extraction of mutational signatures. Any novel mutational signature (one that was not previously observed in the complete SBS catalogues) was reported as a clustered mutational signature.Better separation compared to COSMIC v.2 signaturesAs described in the manuscript, all mutational signatures previously reported in COSMIC v.2 were confirmed in the new set of analyses with median cosine similarity of 0.95. However, the separation between the COSMIC v.2 mutational signatures (https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures_v2) is much worse than the separation between the mutational signatures reported here. For example, in COSMIC v.2, signatures 5 and 16 had a cosine similarity of 0.90, making them hard to distinguish from one another. By contrast, in the current analysis, SBS5 and SBS16 have a cosine similarity of 0.65. This allows us to unambiguously assign SBS5 and SBS16 to different samples. In the current analysis, the larger number of samples has allowed the reduction of bleeding between signatures and has given more unique and easily distinguishable signatures. One can evaluate the overall separation of a set of mutational signatures by examining the distribution of cosine similarities between the signatures in the set. The signatures in COSMIC v.2 had a median cosine similarity of 0.238. By contrast, the current signatures have a much lower median cosine similarity of 0.098. This twofold reduction in similarity is highly statistically significant (P value 9.1 × 10−25) and indicates a better separation between the signatures in the current analysis.Correlations of mutational signature activity with ageBefore evaluating the association between age and the activity of a mutational signature, all outliers for both age and numbers of mutations attributed to a signature in a cancer type were removed from the data. An outlier was defined as any value outside three standard deviations from the mean value. A robust linear regression model that estimated the slope of the line and whether this slope was significantly different from zero (F test; P value < 0.05) was performed using the MATLAB function robustfit (https://www.mathworks.com/help/stats/robustfit.html) with default parameters. The P values from the F tests were corrected using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure for false discovery rates. Results are available at syn12030687 and syn20317940.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability|
Somatic and germline variant calls, mutational signatures, subclonal reconstructions, transcript abundance, splice calls and other core data generated by the ICGC and TCGA PCAWG Consortium are described in ref. 2, and are available for download at https://dcc.icgc.org/releases/PCAWG. Additional information on accessing the data, including raw read files, can be found at https://docs.icgc.org/pcawg/data/. In accordance with the data access policies of the ICGC and TCGA projects, most molecular, clinical and specimen data are in an open tier that does not require access approval. To access information that could potentially identify participants, such as germline alleles and the underlying sequencing data, researchers will need to apply to the TCGA data access committee via dbGaP (https://dbgap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/aa/wga.cgi?page=login) for access to the TCGA portion of the dataset, and to the ICGC data access compliance office (http://icgc.org/daco) for the ICGC portion of the dataset. In addition, to access somatic single nucleotide variants derived from TCGA donors, researchers will also need to obtain dbGaP authorization. For each mutational signature as extracted by SigProfiler, there is a ‘vignette’ that consists of plots and a short textual description at COSMIC (available at https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/). Beyond the core sequence data generated by the ICGC and TCGA PCAWG Consortium, other derived datasets were generated by the research reported in this paper. These derived datasets are available at Synapse (https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn11726601/wiki/513478), and are denoted by accession numbers (synXXXXXXXX). All these datasets are mirrored at https://dcc.icgc.org/releases/PCAWG/mutational_signatures/ with full links, filenames, accession numbers and descriptions as detailed in Supplementary Table 1. These datasets include (1) CSV files comprising all catalogues of observed mutational spectra that were used as input to signature extraction (syn11801889), (2) CSV files and plots of signatures extracted by SigProfiler (syn11738306) and SignatureAnalyzer (syn11738307), (3) CSV files with estimates of the numbers of mutations generated by each signature in individual tumours (syn11804065), (4) estimates of the probability that each signature was responsible for each mutational type (for example, CTG>CAG) in individual tumours (syn11804068) and (5) synthetic test input data plus the results of tests of signature extraction (discovery) on the synthetic test data (syn18497223). All derived datasets are open access, and can be downloaded without registration or logging in.

Code availability|
SigProfiler is available both as a MATLAB framework and as a Python package. In both cases, SigProfiler is a fully functional, free and open-source tool distributed under the permissive 2-Clause BSD License. SigProfiler in MATLAB can be downloaded from: https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/38724-sigprofiler. SigProfiler in Python can be downloaded from: https://github.com/AlexandrovLab/SigProfilerExtractor. SignatureAnalyzer code is available at https://github.com/broadinstitute/getzlab-SignatureAnalyzer (github.com). The code used to generate the synthetic data and summarize SignatureAnalyzer and SigProfiler results is open source and freely available as the SynSig package: https://github.com/steverozen/SynSig/tree/v0.2.0 under the GNU General Public License v.3.0. The core computational pipelines used by the PCAWG Consortium for alignment, quality control and variant calling are available to the public at https://dockstore.org/search?search=pcawg under the GNU General Public License v.3.0, which allows for reuse and distribution.

Acknowledgements|The results here are based in part on data generated by the TCGA research network (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/) and the ICGC and TCGA PCAWG network. This work was supported by Wellcome grant reference 206194 (M.R.S.), Singapore National Medical Research Council grants NMRC/CIRG/1422/2015 and MOH-000032/MOH-CIRG18may-0004 and the Singapore Ministry of Health via the Duke-NUS Signature Research Programmes (M.N.H., A.W.T.N., Y.W., A.B. and S.G.R.), US National Institute of Health Intramural Research Program Project Z1AES103266 (D.A.G.), the European Research Council Consolidator Grant 682398 (N.L.-B.), US National Cancer Institute U24CA143843 (D.A.W.) and Cancer Research UK Grand Challenge Award C98/A24032 (E.N.B., S.M.A.I., L.B.A. and M.R.S.). G.G and J.K were partially supported by the National Cancer Institute grants U24CA210999 and U24CA143845. G.G. was partially supported by the Paul C. Zamecnick, MD, Chair in Oncology at the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center. N.J.H. and G.G. were partially supported by G.G.’s funds at the Broad Institute and Massachusetts General Hospital. N.J.H. was partially funded by the Molecular Biophysics Training Grant NIH/ NIGMS T32 GM008313 (PI: Venkatesh N. Murthy).We acknowledge the contributions of the many clinical networks across the ICGC and TCGA who provided samples and data to the PCAWG Consortium, and the contributions of the Technical Working Group and the Germline Working Group of the PCAWG Consortium for collation, realignment and harmonized variant calling of the cancer genomes used in this study. We thank the patients and their families for their participation in the individual ICGC and TCGA projects. The members of the PCAWG Consortium are listed in Supplementary Note 1.
Author information|Author notesA list of members and their affiliations appears at the end of the paperA list of members and their affiliations appears in the Supplementary InformationThese authors contributed equally: Ludmil B. Alexandrov, Jaegil Kim, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Mi Ni HuangThese authors jointly supervised this work: Gad Getz, Steven G. Rozen, Michael R. StrattonAffiliationsDepartment of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Department of Bioengineering, Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, CA, USALudmil B. Alexandrov, Erik N. Bergstrom, S. M. Ashiqul Islam, Ludmil B. Alexandrov, Erik N. Bergstrom & S. M. Ashiqul IslamBroad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USAJaegil Kim, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Gad Getz, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Jaegil Kim, Michael Lawrence, Paz Polak, Fouad Yousif & Gad GetzCenter for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USANicholas J. Haradhvala, Gad Getz, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Paz Polak & Gad GetzProgramme in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, SingaporeMi Ni Huang, Alvin Wei Tian Ng, Yang Wu, Arnoud Boot, John R. McPherson, Arnoud Boot, Mi Ni Huang, John R. McPherson, Alvin Wei Tian Ng, Steven G. Rozen, Bin Tean Teh, Yang Wu, Willie Yu & Steven G. RozenCentre for Computational Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, SingaporeMi Ni Huang, Alvin Wei Tian Ng, Yang Wu, Arnoud Boot, John R. McPherson, Arnoud Boot, Mi Ni Huang, John R. McPherson, Alvin Wei Tian Ng, Steven G. Rozen, Yang Wu, Willie Yu & Steven G. RozenHuman Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USAKyle R. Covington, David A. Wheeler, Kyle R. Covington & David A. WheelerDan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USAKyle R. Covington & Kyle R. CovingtonGenome Integrity and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, USADmitry A. Gordenin, Dmitry A. Gordenin & Natalie SainiInstitute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, SpainNuria Lopez-Bigas & Nuria Lopez-BigasResearch Program on Biomedical Informatics, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, SpainNuria Lopez-Bigas, Radhakrishnan Sabarinathan, Nuria Lopez-Bigas & Radhakrishnan SabarinathanInstitució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, SpainNuria Lopez-Bigas & Nuria Lopez-BigasIntegrative Bioinformatics Support Group, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, USALeszek J. Klimczak & Leszek J. KlimczakWellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UKSandro Morganella, Iñigo Martincorena, Sandro Morganella, Michael R. Stratton, Ignacio Vázquez-García & Michael R. StrattonNational Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bangalore, IndiaRadhakrishnan Sabarinathan & Radhakrishnan SabarinathanInstitute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona, SpainRadhakrishnan Sabarinathan & Radhakrishnan SabarinathanDepartment of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USADavid A. Wheeler & David A. WheelerDepartment of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandVille Mustonen & Ville MustonenOrganismal and Evolutionary Biology Research Programme, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandVille Mustonen & Ville MustonenInstitute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandVille Mustonen & Ville MustonenDepartment of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USAGad Getz & Gad GetzHarvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAGad Getz, Paz Polak & Gad GetzSingHealth, Duke-NUS Institute of Precision Medicine, National Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeSteven G. Rozen, Bin Tean Teh & Steven G. RozenDepartment of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaPaul BoutrosUniversity of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USAPaul BoutrosComputational Biology Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaPaul Boutros & Stephenie ProkopecDepartment of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaPaul BoutrosDepartment of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, CanadaKin ChanRIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, JapanAkihiro Fujimoto & Hidewaki NakagawaA. A. Kharkevich Institute of Information Transmission Problems, Moscow, RussiaMarat KazanovDmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, RussiaMarat KazanovSkolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, RussiaMarat KazanovLaboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, JapanMichael LawrenceMassachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USAMichael LawrenceSchool of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USASteven A. RobertsCenter for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USASteven A. RobertsLaboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanTatsuhiro ShibataDivision of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, JapanTatsuhiro ShibataThe Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanYuichi ShiraishiCancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeBin Tean TehInstitute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, SingaporeBin Tean TehLaboratory of Cancer Epigenome, Division of Medical Science, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeBin Tean TehDepartment of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USAIgnacio Vázquez-GarcíaDepartment of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USAIgnacio Vázquez-GarcíaDepartment of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKIgnacio Vázquez-GarcíaAuthorsLudmil B. AlexandrovView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJaegil KimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarNicholas J. HaradhvalaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMi Ni HuangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAlvin Wei Tian NgView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarYang WuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarArnoud BootView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKyle R. CovingtonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarDmitry A. GordeninView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarErik N. BergstromView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarS. M. Ashiqul IslamView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarNuria Lopez-BigasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarLeszek J. KlimczakView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJohn R. McPhersonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSandro MorganellaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarRadhakrishnan SabarinathanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarDavid A. WheelerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarVille MustonenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarGad GetzView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSteven G. RozenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMichael R. StrattonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarConsortiaPCAWG Mutational Signatures Working GroupLudmil B. Alexandrov, Erik N. Bergstrom, Arnoud Boot, Paul Boutros, Kin Chan, Kyle R. Covington, Akihiro Fujimoto, Gad Getz, Dmitry A. Gordenin, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Mi Ni Huang, S. M. Ashiqul Islam, Marat Kazanov, Jaegil Kim, Leszek J. Klimczak, Nuria Lopez-Bigas, Michael Lawrence, Iñigo Martincorena, John R. McPherson, Sandro Morganella, Ville Mustonen, Hidewaki Nakagawa, Alvin Wei Tian Ng, Paz Polak, Stephenie Prokopec, Steven A. Roberts, Steven G. Rozen, Radhakrishnan Sabarinathan, Natalie Saini, Tatsuhiro Shibata, Yuichi Shiraishi, Michael R. Stratton, Bin Tean Teh, Ignacio Vázquez-García, David A. Wheeler, Yang Wu, Fouad Yousif & Willie YuPCAWG ConsortiumContributionsThe ICGC and TCGA contributed collectively to this work under the guidance of PCAWG Steering and Executive Committees, and the Ethics and Legal Working Group. The International Cancer Genome Consortium and TCGA tumour specific providers provided tumour and matched non-tumour samples, and the PCAWG Technical Working Group, the PCAWG Quality Control Working Group and the PCAWG Novel Somatic Mutation Calling Methods Working Group provided standardized mutation calls for the 2,780 PCAWG whole genomes. G.G., S.G.R. and M.R.S. were project leaders; L.B.A., G.G., S.G.R. and M.R.S. obtained funding for this study; L.B.A., J.K., N.J.H., G.G., S.G.R. and M.R.S. designed this study; M.N.H., A.W.T.N., A.B., E.N.B., J.R.M. and S.G.R. collected and prepared data for analysis; L.B.A., J.K., E.N.B. and S.M.A.I. created mutational signature analysis software; L.B.A., J.K., N.J.H., A.W.T.N., A.B., K.R.C., D.A.G., N.L.-B., L.J.K., S.M., R.S., D.A.W., V.M., G.G., S.G.R. and M.R.S. analysed data and reviewed results; L.B.A., J.K., N.J.H., G.G., S.G.R. and M.R.S. wrote the paper; L.B.A., J.K., N.J.H., M.N.H. and A.W.T.N. created figures; and Y.W. and S.G.R. generated synthetic data and benchmarked signature analysis software.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Steven G. Rozen or Michael R. Stratton.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
G.G. receives research funds from IBM and Pharmacyclics and is an inventor on patent applications related to MuTect, ABSOLUTE, MutSig, MSMuTect and POLYSOLVER. All the other authors have no competing interests.

Additional information|Peer review information Nature thanks Arul Chinnaiyan and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Extended data figures and tables|Extended Data Fig. 1 Histogram of the number of signatures attributed in each of 2,780 PCAWG samples by SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer.Hypermutated tumours and melanomas (156) are listed at syn11738314.Extended Data Fig. 2 Comparisons between results of SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer.a, b, Comparison of the attributions for corresponding SigProfiler (a) and SignatureAnalyzer (b) signatures. Each one of the SBS signatures extracted by SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer was paired with the signature of highest cosine similarity in the extraction by the other method (if one with >0.85 cosine similarity exists). The first column of the plot corresponds to the fraction of mutations assigned by one method (summed across samples and mutation types) that was also assigned by the other method. The remaining mutations were then redistributed to the other signatures in the extraction, weighted by their relative probabilities of having been generated by each signature and the resulting fraction of mutations was then plotted. Signatures on the x axis are shown only if they contribute at least a 0.1 fraction of mutations to at least one signature on the y axis. c, d, Cosine similarities between SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer DBS (c) and indel (d) signatures. Brown nodes represent SigProfiler signatures; green nodes represent SignatureAnalyzer signatures. Matches with cosine similarities > 0.8 are shown as edges; the width of the edge indicates the strength of the similarity. The locations of the nodes have no meaning. Signatures with no matches of >0.8 cosine similarity are shown below. SigProfiler ID15 and ID17 were extracted from data that were not analysed by SignatureAnalyzer. The suffix ‘P’ on a SignatureAnalyzer signature name indicates a signature extracted from non-hypermutated, non-melanoma tumours. The suffix ‘S’ on a SignatureAnalyzer signature name indicates a signature extracted from hypermutated or melanoma tumours.Extended Data Fig. 3 SignatureAnalyzer reference signatures.The classifications of each mutation type (SBS, 96 classes; DBS, 78 classes; and indels, 83 classes) are described in the main text.Extended Data Fig. 4 The number of SBS mutations attributed to each mutational signature for each cancer type over the PCAWG tumours by SignatureAnalyzer.Conventions are as in Fig. 3; see this figure for explanation.Extended Data Fig. 5 The number of SBS mutations attributed to each mutational signature to each cancer type over the complete set of PCAWG and non-PCAWG cancer samples analysed by SigProfiler.Conventions are as in Fig. 3; see this figure for explanation.Extended Data Fig. 6 Associations between SBS, DBS and indel signature activities for SigProfiler and SignatureAnalyzer.a, b, Each node represents an SBS (light green), DBS (dark green) or indel (black) signature. Any two signatures with sample attributions that significantly correlated with R2 > 0.3 (SigProfiler) (a) or > 0.5 (SignatureAnalyzer) (b) are connected by edges. Edge widths are proportional to the strength of the correlation. Signatures with no significant correlation to any other signature above the relevant threshold are not shown. Signature locations are fit for display purposes only, and do not indicate similarity.Extended Data Fig. 7 Mutational signatures extracted from the COMPOSITE feature set consisting of the concatenation of SBSs in pentanucleotide context, DBSs and indels.For each of the 4 COMPOSITE mutational signatures shown, the top panel shows the SBS signature in pentanucleotide context (1,536 mutation classes) after being collapsed to 96 SBS mutation classes, the middle panel is the co-extracted DBS signature and the bottom panel is the co-extracted indel signature. There are similarities between the DBS portion of Composite-4 and DBS2, and between the indel portion of Composite-4 and ID3; other similarities are noted in the figure.Extended Data Fig. 8 SigProfiler signature extraction and attribution.A full description is provided in Supplementary Note 2. a, Procedure for extracting (discovering) mutational signatures. Step A, apply the approach to a set of samples D; initially D contains all samples (that is, D = M). This step has previously been described in detail17. Step B, solution evaluation and re-iteration. Extracted mutational signatures and their activities in individual samples are saved into a set (S). The activity of any signature that does not increase the cosine similarity of a sample by > 0.01 was removed from the sample (assigned a value of 0). Step A is repeated for all samples for which the identified signatures do not explain their patterns (cosine similarity < 0.95). The algorithm continues to step C when step A cannot find any stable signatures. Step C, clustering of mutational signatures. Hierarchical consensus clustering was applied to the set S to derive the consensus mutational signatures across the set of samples M. b, Attribution of activities of mutational signatures in samples.Extended Data Table 1 The number of DBSs is proportional to the number of SBSs, with few exceptionsFull size tableExtended Data Table 2 Numbers of insertion and deletion mutations due to ID1, ID2 and all other indel signatures in hypermuted and non-hypermutated tumoursFull size table
Supplementary information|
Supplementary TableThis file contains Supplementary Table 1: Summary of datasets used in this paper.Reporting SummarySupplementary InformationSupplementary Note 1: Members of the TCGA/ICGC Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes Network.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Note 2: Additional methods details.
Rights and permissions|
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleAlexandrov, L.B., Kim, J., Haradhvala, N.J. et al. The repertoire of mutational signatures in human cancer.
                    Nature 578, 94–101 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-1943-3Download citationReceived: 18 May 2018Accepted: 18 November 2019Published: 05 February 2020Issue Date: 06 February 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-1943-3
Further reading|g





                  The mutREAD method detects mutational signatures from low quantities of cancer DNA
                


Juliane Perner, Sujath Abbas, Karol Nowicki-Osuch, Ginny Devonshire, Matthew D. Eldridge, Simon Tavaré & Rebecca C. Fitzgerald

Nature Communications
                (2020)
              




                  The Impact of Whole Genome Data on Therapeutic Decision-Making in Metastatic Prostate Cancer: A Retrospective Analysis
                


Megan Crumbaker, Eva K. F. Chan, Tingting Gong, Niall Corcoran, Weerachai Jaratlerdsiri, Ruth J. Lyons, Anne-Maree Haynes, Anna A. Kulidjian, Anton M. F. Kalsbeek, Desiree C. Petersen, Phillip D. Stricker, Christina A. M. Jamieson, Peter I. Croucher, Christopher M. Hovens, Anthony M. Joshua & Vanessa M. Hayes

Cancers
                (2020)
              




                  Global genomics project unravels cancer’s complexity at unprecedented scale
                


Marcin Cieslik & Arul M. Chinnaiyan

Nature
                (2020)
              




                  The role of host environment in cancer evolution
                


Eric Solary & Lucie Lapane

Evolutionary Applications
                (2020)
              




                  Wnts and the hallmarks of cancer
                


Zheng Zhong, Jia Yu, David M. Virshup & Babita Madan

Cancer and Metastasis Reviews
                (2020)
              




Comments|By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.
Abstract|Pain is an integrative phenomenon that results from dynamic interactions between sensory and contextual (i.e., cognitive, emotional, and motivational) processes. In the brain the experience of pain is associated with neuronal oscillations and synchrony at different frequencies. However, an overarching framework for the significance of oscillations for pain remains lacking. Recent concepts relate oscillations at different frequencies to the routing of information flow in the brain and the signaling of predictions and prediction errors. The application of these concepts to pain promises insights into how flexible routing of information flow coordinates diverse processes that merge into the experience of pain. Such insights might have implications for the understanding and treatment of chronic pain.
Dear Editor,|In December 2019, a novel pneumonia caused by a previously unknown pathogen emerged in Wuhan, a city of 11 million people in central China. The initial cases were linked to exposures in a seafood market in Wuhan.1 As of January 27, 2020, the Chinese authorities reported 2835 confirmed cases in mainland China, including 81 deaths. Additionally, 19 confirmed cases were identified in Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan, and 39 imported cases were identified in Thailand, Japan, South Korea, United States, Vietnam, Singapore, Nepal, France, Australia and Canada. The pathogen was soon identified as a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), which is closely related to sever acute respiratory syndrome CoV (SARS-CoV).2 Currently, there is no specific treatment against the new virus. Therefore, identifying effective antiviral agents to combat the disease is urgently needed.An efficient approach to drug discovery is to test whether the existing antiviral drugs are effective in treating related viral infections. The 2019-nCoV belongs to Betacoronavirus which also contains SARS-CoV and Middle East respiratory syndrome CoV (MERS-CoV). Several drugs, such as ribavirin, interferon, lopinavir-ritonavir, corticosteroids, have been used in patients with SARS or MERS, although the efficacy of some drugs remains controversial.3 In this study, we evaluated the antiviral efficiency of five FAD-approved drugs including ribavirin, penciclovir, nitazoxanide, nafamostat, chloroquine and two well-known broad-spectrum antiviral drugs remdesivir (GS-5734) and favipiravir (T-705) against a clinical isolate of 2019-nCoV in vitro.Standard assays were carried out to measure the effects of these compounds on the cytotoxicity, virus yield and infection rates of 2019-nCoVs. Firstly, the cytotoxicity of the candidate compounds in Vero E6 cells (ATCC-1586) was determined by the CCK8 assay. Then, Vero E6 cells were infected with nCoV-2019BetaCoV/Wuhan/WIV04/20192 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.05 in the presence of varying concentrations of the test drugs. DMSO was used in the controls. Efficacies were evaluated by quantification of viral copy numbers in the cell supernatant via quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and confirmed with visualization of virus nucleoprotein (NP) expression through immunofluorescence microscopy at 48 h post infection (p.i.) (cytopathic effect was not obvious at this time point of infection). Among the seven tested drugs, high concentrations of three nucleoside analogs including ribavirin (half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) = 109.50 μM, half-cytotoxic concentration (CC50) > 400 μM, selectivity index (SI) > 3.65), penciclovir (EC50 = 95.96 μM, CC50 > 400 μM, SI > 4.17) and favipiravir (EC50 = 61.88 μM, CC50 > 400 μM, SI > 6.46) were required to reduce the viral infection (Fig. 1a and Supplementary information, Fig. S1). However, favipiravir has been shown to be 100% effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus challenge, although its EC50 value in Vero E6 cells was as high as 67 μM,4 suggesting further in vivo studies are recommended to evaluate this antiviral nucleoside. Nafamostat, a potent inhibitor of MERS-CoV, which prevents membrane fusion, was inhibitive against the 2019-nCoV infection (EC50 = 22.50 μM, CC50 > 100 μM, SI > 4.44). Nitazoxanide, a commercial antiprotozoal agent with an antiviral potential against a broad range of viruses including human and animal coronaviruses, inhibited the 2019-nCoV at a low-micromolar concentration (EC50 = 2.12 μM; CC50 > 35.53 μM; SI > 16.76). Further in vivo evaluation of this drug against 2019-nCoV infection is recommended. Notably, two compounds remdesivir (EC50 = 0.77 μM; CC50 > 100 μM; SI > 129.87) and chloroquine (EC50 = 1.13 μM; CC50 > 100 μM, SI > 88.50) potently blocked virus infection at low-micromolar concentration and showed high SI (Fig. 1a, b).Fig. 1: The antiviral activities of the test drugs against 2019-nCoV in vitro.a Vero E6 cells were infected with 2019-nCoV at an MOI of 0.05 in the treatment of different doses of the indicated antivirals for 48 h. The viral yield in the cell supernatant was then quantified by qRT-PCR. Cytotoxicity of these drugs to Vero E6 cells was measured by CCK-8 assays. The left and right Y-axis of the graphs represent mean % inhibition of virus yield and cytotoxicity of the drugs, respectively. The experiments were done in triplicates. b Immunofluorescence microscopy of virus infection upon treatment of remdesivir and chloroquine. Virus infection and drug treatment were performed as mentioned above. At 48 h p.i., the infected cells were fixed, and then probed with rabbit sera against the NP of a bat SARS-related CoV2 as the primary antibody and Alexa 488-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:500; Abcam) as the secondary antibody, respectively. The nuclei were stained with Hoechst dye. Bars, 100 μm. c and d Time-of-addition experiment of remdesivir and chloroquine. For “Full-time” treatment, Vero E6 cells were pre-treated with the drugs for 1 h, and virus was then added to allow attachment for 2 h. Afterwards, the virus–drug mixture was removed, and the cells were cultured with drug-containing medium until the end of the experiment. For “Entry” treatment, the drugs were added to the cells for 1 h before viral attachment, and at 2 h p.i., the virus–drug mixture was replaced with fresh culture medium and maintained till the end of the experiment. For “Post-entry” experiment, drugs were added at 2 h p.i., and maintained until the end of the experiment. For all the experimental groups, cells were infected with 2019-nCoV at an MOI of 0.05, and virus yield in the infected cell supernatants was quantified by qRT-PCR c and NP expression in infected cells was analyzed by Western blot d at 14 h p.i.Full size imageRemdesivir has been recently recognized as a promising antiviral drug against a wide array of RNA viruses (including SARS/MERS-CoV5) infection in cultured cells, mice and nonhuman primate (NHP) models. It is currently under clinical development for the treatment of Ebola virus infection.6 Remdesivir is an adenosine analogue, which incorporates into nascent viral RNA chains and results in pre-mature termination.7 Our time-of-addition assay showed remdesivir functioned at a stage post virus entry (Fig. 1c, d), which is in agreement with its putative anti-viral mechanism as a nucleotide analogue. Warren et al. showed that in NHP model, intravenous administration of 10 mg/kg dose of remdesivir resulted in concomitant persistent levels of its active form in the blood (10 μM) and conferred 100% protection against Ebola virus infection.7 Our data showed that EC90 value of remdesivir against 2019-nCoV in Vero E6 cells was 1.76 μM, suggesting its working concentration is likely to be achieved in NHP. Our preliminary data (Supplementary information, Fig. S2) showed that remdesivir also inhibited virus infection efficiently in a human cell line (human liver cancer Huh-7 cells), which is sensitive to 2019-nCoV.2Chloroquine, a widely-used anti-malarial and autoimmune disease drug, has recently been reported as a potential broad-spectrum antiviral drug.8,9 Chloroquine is known to block virus infection by increasing endosomal pH required for virus/cell fusion, as well as interfering with the glycosylation of cellular receptors of SARS-CoV.10 Our time-of-addition assay demonstrated that chloroquine functioned at both entry, and at post-entry stages of the 2019-nCoV infection in Vero E6 cells (Fig. 1c, d). Besides its antiviral activity, chloroquine has an immune-modulating activity, which may synergistically enhance its antiviral effect in vivo. Chloroquine is widely distributed in the whole body, including lung, after oral administration. The EC90 value of chloroquine against the 2019-nCoV in Vero E6 cells was 6.90 μM, which can be clinically achievable as demonstrated in the plasma of rheumatoid arthritis patients who received 500 mg administration.11 Chloroquine is a cheap and a safe drug that has been used for more than 70 years and, therefore, it is potentially clinically applicable against the 2019-nCoV.Our findings reveal that remdesivir and chloroquine are highly effective in the control of 2019-nCoV infection in vitro. Since these compounds have been used in human patients with a safety track record and shown to be effective against various ailments, we suggest that they should be assessed in human patients suffering from the novel coronavirus disease.
Acknowledgements|We thank Xi Wang, Yan Wu, Weijuan Shang, Huanyu Zhang, Yufeng Li, Hengrui Hu, Xiaming Jiang, Yuan Sun, from Wuhan Institute of Virology for their essential assistance with this study. We thank Prof. Fei Deng from National Virus Resource Center, and Tao Du, Jia Wu and Hao Tang from BSL-3 Laboratory of Wuhan Institute of Virology for their critical support. We thank Prof. Yanyi Wang and other colleagues of Wuhan Institute of Virology and Wuhan National Biosafety Laboratory for their excellent coordination. We thank Dr. Basil Arif for scientific editing of the manuscript. We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions. This work was supported in part by grants from the National Science and Technology Major Projects for “Major New Drugs Innovation and Development” (directed by Prof. Song Li) (2018ZX09711003), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31621061), and the Emergency Scientific Research Project for 2019-nCoV from Hubei Province (to Profs. Zhengli Shi and Gengfu Xiao).
Author information|Author notesThese authors contributed equally: Manli Wang, Ruiyuan Cao, Leike Zhang, Xinglou Yang.AffiliationsState Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 430071, Wuhan, ChinaManli Wang, Leike Zhang, Xinglou Yang, Jia Liu, Mingyue Xu, Zhengli Shi, Zhihong Hu & Gengfu XiaoNational Engineering Research Center for the Emergency Drug, Beijing Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 100850, Beijing, ChinaRuiyuan Cao & Wu ZhongAuthorsManli WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarRuiyuan CaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarLeike ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarXinglou YangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJia LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMingyue XuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarZhengli ShiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarZhihong HuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarWu ZhongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarGengfu XiaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsG.X., W.Z., Z.H., M.W., R.C., and L.Z. conceived and designed the experiments. X.Y., J.L., M.X., M.W., R.C., and L.Z. participated in multiple experiments; G.X., W.Z., Z.H., Z.S., M.W., R.C., and L.Z. analyzed the data. M.W., L.Z., R.C., and Z.H. wrote the manuscript. G.X., W.Z., and Z.H. provided the final approval of the manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Zhihong Hu or Wu Zhong or Gengfu Xiao.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplementary information|
Supplementary information, Materials and Figures
Rights and permissions|
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleWang, M., Cao, R., Zhang, L. et al. Remdesivir and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently emerged novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro.
                    Cell Res 30, 269–271 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0Download citationReceived: 25 January 2020Accepted: 28 January 2020Published: 04 February 2020Issue Date: March 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-020-0282-0
Further reading|g





                  Prevention and management of COVID-19 among patients with diabetes: an appraisal of the literature
                


Prasad Katulanda, Harsha A. Dissanayake, Ishara Ranathunga, Vithiya Ratnasamy, Piyumi S. A. Wijewickrama, Nilukshana Yogendranathan, Kavinga K. K. Gamage, Nipun L. de Silva, Manilka Sumanatilleke, Noel P. Somasundaram & David R. Matthews

Diabetologia
                (2020)
              




                  Can Nanotechnology and Materials Science Help the Fight against SARS-CoV-2?
                


Maria Chiara Sportelli, Margherita Izzi, Ekaterina A. Kukushkina, Syed Imdadul Hossain, Rosaria Anna Picca, Nicoletta Ditaranto & Nicola Cioffi

Nanomaterials
                (2020)
              




                  Gastrointestinal and liver manifestations of COVID-19
                


Janice Cheong, Nichoals Bartell, Thoetchai Peeraphatdit, Mahmoud Mosli & Bandar Al-Judaibi

Saudi Journal of Gastroenterology
                (2020)
              




                  Virtual screening of approved drugs as potential SARS-CoV-2 main protease inhibitors
                


Alicia Jiménez-Alberto, Rosa María Ribas-Aparicio, Gerardo Aparicio-Ozores & Juan A. Castelán-Vega

Computational Biology and Chemistry
                (2020)
              




                  Recent insights for the emerging COVID-19: drug discovery, therapeutic options and vaccine development
                


Yuefei Zhu, Jia Li & Zhiqing Pang

Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences
                (2020)
              




Abstract|Investigation of tree growth in Isle Royale National Park in Michigan revealed the influence of herbivores and carnivores on plants in an intimately linked food chain. Plant growth rates were regulated by cycles in animal density and responded to annual changes in primary productivity only when released from herbivory by wolf predation. Isle Royale's dendrochronology complements a rich literature on food chain control in aquatic systems, which often supports a trophic cascade model. This study provides evidence of top-down control in a forested ecosystem.
Abstract|Purpose of ReviewSevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the virus responsible for the aggressive coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Recently, investigators have stipulated that COVID-19 patients receiving angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) may be subject to poorer outcomes. This editorial presents the available evidence to guide treatment practices during this pandemic.Recent FindingsRecent studies from Wuhan cohorts provide valuable information about COVID-19. A cohort with 52 critically ill patients revealed cardiac injury in 12% of patients. Worse outcomes appear to be more prevalent in patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus (DM), possibly due to overexpression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor in airway alveolar epithelial cells. Investigators suspect that SARS-CoV-2 uses the ACE2 receptor to enter the lungs in a mechanism similar to SARS-CoV. Several hypotheses have been proposed to date regarding the net effect of ACEI/ARB on COVID-19 infections. Positive effects include ACE2 receptor blockade, disabling viral entry into the heart and lungs, and an overall decrease in inflammation secondary to ACEI/ARB. Negative effects include a possible retrograde feedback mechanism, by which ACE2 receptors are upregulated.SummaryEven though physiological models of SARS-CoV infection show a theoretical benefit of ACEI/ARB, these findings cannot be extrapolated to SARS-CoV-2 causing COVID-19. Major cardiology scientific associations, including ACC, HFSA, AHA, and ESC Hypertension Council, have rejected these correlation hypotheses. After an extensive literature review, we conclude that there is no significant evidence to support an association for now, but given the rapid evolvement of this pandemic, findings may change.Keywords: COVID-19, SARS-COV 2, ACEI, ARB, ACE2 receptor
Introduction|Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the virus responsible for COVID-19, a global pandemic with catastrophic consequences for healthcare systems and populations around the world. SARS-CoV-2 was initially described in December 2019 in Wuhan, China [1]. The virus rapidly escalated and on March 11, 2020; the World Health Organization declared it a pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 shares similarities with SARS-CoV, the virus responsible for the 2002–2003 SARS epidemic, and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS), the virus responsible for MERS [2]. Following the SARS epidemic, researchers extensively investigated the pathophysiologic mechanisms of SARS-CoV infection, including the interaction of the virus with the heart and lungs. Based on these studies, researchers believe that the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, located on alveolar epithelial cells, serves as a high affinity receptor and co-transporter for SARS-CoV-2 to enter the lungs [3]. Medications, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI), block ACE2 receptors, which may predispose or protect against COVID-19 infection. This editorial summarizes the current scientific evidence surrounding this subject in order to guide clinical practice.
Background|The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) maintains plasma sodium concentration via feedback from blood pressure, baroreceptors, and sodium and potassium levels. First, the kidneys secrete renin, which metabolizes angiotensinogen into angiotensin I. Next, the kidneys and lungs secrete ACE, which converts angiotensin I into angiotensin II. Finally, angiotensin II stimulates vasoconstriction, cardiovascular response, and aldosterone and ADH production; this ultimately increases blood pressure and body fluid volume through sodium, potassium, and free water resorption [3]. ACE2 receptor, a homolog of the angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) receptor, is a type I transmembrane aminopeptidase with high expression in heart and lung tissue [4], but which is also expressed in the endothelium and kidney (see Fig. 1, illustrating the RAAS activation pathway). Discovered in 2000, ACE2 receptor appears to counter-regulate RAAS activation by degrading angiotensin II [5]. The RAAS system is widely implicated in DM, hypertension, and heart failure. ACEI and ARB drugs, based upon strong evidence of efficacy, are commonly used in the management of hypertension, heart failure, post myocardial infarction care, and to slow progression of renal disease associated with diabetes.Open in a separate windowFig. 1RAAS pathway showing ACEI/ARB mechanism of action and SARS and SARS-COV2 infectious mechanism via ACE2 receptors
COVID-19 and Comorbidity|With the exponential rise of COVID-19 cases worldwide, observational studies have identified risk factors for infection and poor outcomes. Three separate studies identified hypertension and DM as highly prevalent among COVID-19 patients:A.According to Yang et al., among 52 critically ill patients, DM was present in 17% of cases [6].B.According to Guan et al., among 1099 patients, DM was present in 16.2% of cases and hypertension was present in 23.7% of cases [7].C.According to Zhang et al., among 140 hospitalized patients, DM was present in 12% of cases and hypertension was present in 30% of cases [8].While both hypertension and DM are treated with ACEI and ARB, medication use was not assessed in any of the three aforementioned studies, leading to an inconclusive hypothesis. However, one study to date has analyzed the effect of ACEI and ARB use on the COVID-19 population. According to Peng et al., among 112 patients, cardiovascular comorbidities led to worse outcomes, with most deaths occurring secondary to fulminant inflammation, lactic acidosis, and thrombotic states [9]. ACEI and ARB use did not influence morbidity or mortality [9].In addition to these observations, there is a well-known association between the viruses, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, and deleterious cardiac events, including cardiac injury in SARS-CoV as well as myocarditis and heart failure in MERS-CoV [10]. Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 was recently associated with cardiac injury, defined by a troponin > 28 pg/ml or electrocardiogram/echocardiogram abnormalities, in 12% of patients from a COVID-19 cohort. These data demonstrate a cardiac affinity with all three viruses [11].
Pros and Cons of ACE Inhibition|The etiology of cardiac damage in patients with COVID-19 is unclear, but ACE2 receptors may play a role, given the high affinity of SARS-CoV for ACE2 receptors [12]. A recent commentary published in the Lancet Respiratory Medicine hypothesizes that the use of ACE2 receptor increasing drugs is at higher risk for severe COVID-19 infection. ACEI initially inhibits ACE leading to decreased angiotensin I levels, causing a possible negative feedback loop that ultimately upregulates more ACE2 receptor to be able to interact with the decreased angiotensin I substrate available [13] (see Fig. ​Fig.1.).1.). This ACE2 receptor upregulation results in increased binding sites for SARS-CoV-2, leading to preferential COVID-19 infection. This is particularly observed in patients with diabetes and/or hypertension, since they are usually taking ACEI or ARB [12]. This comment was released before the findings published by Peng et al. [9]. An editorial response by Sommerstein et al. [14], based on the findings by Ferrario et al. showing a 5-fold increase in ACE2 levels with lisinopril and 3-fold increase in ACE2 levels with losartan [15], was published in the British Medical Journal.Conversely, some investigators argue that ACEI or ARB use may be beneficial in COVID-19 infection prevention. Li et al., for example, proposed that ACEI inhibition of ACE may stimulate a negative feedback (given the lack of angiotensin II, upregulating ACE2 receptors and decreasing overall inflammation [16]). Sun et al. argued that ACEI use im pairs the ACE/angiotensin II/angiotensin-1 receptor pathway, therefore, impairing the integrity of the ACE2/angiotensin 1–7/MAS (MAS-related G protein-coupled receptor). A disruption of the ACE2/angiotensin 1–7/MAS pathway could lead to decreased production of ACE2, decreasing chances of SARS-CoV-2 entering the cell [17]. Some RAAS inactivated animal models demonstrate symptom relief in acute severe pneumonia and respiratory failure, through vasoconstriction mechanisms [17]. Recent findings also demonstrate that patients on the ARB olmesartan had increased secretion of urinary ACE2, likely from an upregulation mechanism, although unclear [18]. Despite this hypothesis of ACE2 upregulation, a causal relationship decreasing mortality has not been demonstrated.Finally, given the contradictory hypotheses, rapidly evolving nature of the disease, and social media-related hysteria, several cardiology associations (HFSA/ACC/AHA and ESC Hypertension Council) released an official statement regarding the continuation of ACEI and ARB for COVID-19 patients [19]. The associations strongly recommend continuing treatment with ACEI/ARB in patients who were previously taking either class of medication.
Conclusions|There is a lack of scientific evidence and clinical data to support discontinuing ACE/ARB use in patients with COVID-19 and co-existing heart failure, hypertension, or ischemic heart disease. The well-studied reduction in mortality conferred by ACE/ARB use and the beneficial effects for patients with diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and proteinuria or albuminuria currently outweigh the theoretical risks. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve and affect more patients with cardiovascular comorbidities, further research is needed to clarify the accuracy of existing hypotheses.
Compliance with Ethical Standards|Conflict of InterestDr. Rico-Mesa and Ms. White have nothing to disclose. Dr. Anderson has received honoraria from Novartis, Pfizer. He is a consultant for Edwards LifeSciences and received research support from Abbott.Human and Animal Rights and Informed ConsentThis manuscript does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects.
Footnotes|Juan Simon Rico-Mesa and Averi White share first authorshipPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Contributor Information|Juan Simon Rico-Mesa, Email: ude.ascshtu@sjasem.Averi White, Email: ude.ascshtu.liamevil@4aetihw.Allen S. Anderson, Email: ude.ascshtu@4anosrednA.
Abstract|BackgroundGlobally, sexual violence is prevalent, particularly for adolescent women. This cluster-randomized controlled implementation trial examines empowerment self-defense (ESD) for sexual assault risk reduction among school-age women in Malawi.MethodsThe unit of randomization and analysis was the school (n = 141). Intervention participants received a 12-h intervention over 6 weeks, with refreshers. Primary outcomes were past-year prevalence and incident rate of sexual violence. Secondary outcomes included confidence, self-defense knowledge, and, for those victimized, violence disclosure. Interaction effects on outcomes were evaluated with Poisson models with school-correlated robust variance estimates for risk ratios and incident rate ratios (baseline n = 6644, follow-up n = 4278).ResultsPast-year sexual assault prevalence was reduced among intervention students (risk ratio [RR] 0.68, 95% CI 0.56, 0.82), but not control students (interaction effect p < 0.001). Significant increases in self-defense knowledge were observed solely among intervention students (RR 3.33, 95% CI 2.76, 4.02; interaction effect p < 0.001). Significant changes in sexual violence prevalence and knowledge were observed for both primary and secondary students. Favorable reductions were also observed in sexual violence incident rate among students overall (interaction effect p = 0.01).ConclusionsThis intervention reduced sexual violence victimization in both primary and secondary school settings. Results support the effectiveness of ESD to address sexual violence, and approach the elimination of violence against women and girls set forth with Sustainable Development Goal #5. Implementation within the education system can enable sustainability and reach.Trial registrationPan African Clinical Trials Registry PACTR201702002028911. Registered 09 February 2017. Retrospectively registered.
Background|Gender-based violence (GBV), i.e., violence perpetrated based on sex or gender identity [1], has been recognized as a public health and human rights issue since 1993 [2]. Globally, an estimated one in three women experiences physical or sexual violence [3]. Physical, sexual and mental health morbidities resulting from gender-based violence are well-characterized [4, 5] and include unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted infection including HIV. Adolescents are at high risk for GBV [6]; accordingly, research priorities for adolescent sexual and reproductive health in low and middle-income countries (LMICs) highlight GBV prevention [7]. Adolescents’ young age and relative inexperience can constrain their relationship power and incur risk, particularly with older partners [8–11]. Violence can set young women on a trajectory for future violence [12, 13] and sexual risk behavior [14].Malawi is a critical setting for preventing and responding to GBV, particularly sexual violence against young women, for whom the prevention evidence lags behind. Recent national data from Malawi reveal that an estimated one in five (21.8%) young adult women experienced sexual abuse prior to age 18, primarily perpetrated by boyfriends, classmates and acquaintances [15]. Other nationally representative data estimate that one in four (25%) sexually experienced women ages 15–19 characterize their sexual debut as forced, well above estimates pooled across all available data globally (15%) and within the region (21%) [6]. For youth, gender-based power disparities can be exacerbated by age-based power disparities; for almost half of female childhood (< 18 years) sexual abuse victims, perpetrators were five or more years older [15]. The health and development impact of sexual violence is profound. As in other settings, sexual violence against young women in Malawi is associated with poor outcomes across domains of sexual and reproductive health [16], and mental health [16]. Victimization can also undermine school enrollment and progress [17], thus compromising women’s future engagement in political, business and economic sectors.These patterns play out against pervasive gender-based violence and stark gender disparities within the nation. An estimated 40% of ever-married women in Malawi have experienced intimate partner violence in their lifetimes, with past-year abuse affecting 30% [18]. National data also confirm the dominance of husbands in decision-making over household spending and access to health care [18]. The 2014 Gender Inequality Index, which reflects gender inequalities in reproductive health, empowerment and economic activity, ranked Malawi at 140 out of 154 countries, largely reflecting maternal mortality and adolescent fertility indicators as well as gender-based educational disparities [19]. These structural-level factors and adolescents’ experiences of sexual violence create an entrenched, mutually reinforcing cycle whereby tolerance of abuse, and structural gender inequalities perpetuate sexual violence. Simultaneously, sustained violence undermines gender equality through conveying the notion that young women are not valued, and by curtailing their engagement in education, employment and mobility based on safety concerns [20, 21].Addressing sexual violence in Malawi and other endemic settings requires responding to structural forces, including social norms that tolerate sexual violence and expect silence and isolation in response, particularly for young women. Empowerment self-defense (ESD) is an interactive training experience that prepares participants for mental, verbal and physical self-defense through bolstering verbal and physical safety skills, and imparts the self-confidence to implement them. Safety promotion can reduce danger, and shift power away from potential abusers. Moreover, through preparation and practice, participants cultivate use of their voice and personal power in a striking contrast to social expectations of silence and compliance that enable continued violence perpetration with impunity. ESD provides active tools for resistance, thus responding to structural forces that disempower young women, blame them for victimization and undermine safety.While a comprehensive approach to sexual violence prevention necessarily entails addressing perpetration, there remains a sustained need to assist women in resisting sexual violence, particularly in high-prevalence contexts such as Malawi. As leading scholars articulate, such risk reduction interventions can and must be implemented in a way that does not blame victims for their experiences,  but rather strengthens resistance to victim-blaming for such experiences [22]. Recent reviews suggest ESD is a promising yet underutilized strategy for violence risk reduction, though discourse and evaluation to date has primarily focused on college and university campuses, predominantly in higher income contexts [22, 23]. In college and university settings, sexual violence interventions that incorporate self-defense have been shown to reduce sexual assault [24] including both completed and attempted rape [25]. These reductions in violence may reflect the increases observed in both confidence in resisting sexual violence [24, 26] and behavioral strategies for self-protection [26]. ESD has had limited uptake in LMIC settings; one notable exception is its implementation and evaluation in the densely populated urban communities of Nairobi, Kenya, where it was found to reduce sexual assault incidence among young women [27, 28], and also buffered against pregnancy-related school dropout, suggesting a cascade impact on health and well-being [29].This study sought to determine the effect of a standardized 6-week ESD program (IMPower) on sexual violence outcomes among primary and secondary school girls in three distinct districts of Malawi, relative to a control condition who received life-skills training. We also explore impact on proximal outcomes including self-defense knowledge, and confidence/ self-efficacy, and disclosure of violence. This cluster-randomized implementation trial was conducted in the context of the expansion of IMpower into Malawi schools through the UNICEF Safe Schools Initiative. It extends the limited knowledge base on ESD in LMICs, and explores its value in more diffuse and heterogeneous settings.
Methods|Setting, recruitment and data collectionThis study was implemented in the Malawi districts of Lilongwe, Dedza, and Salima, selected for heterogeneity and based on designation as priority, high-need settings for UNICEF’s Safe Schools Program. Lilongwe, the capital, is the most urbanized site. Dedza lies south of Lilongwe, in the mountains on the Mozambique border. Salima is located on the lake. Within districts, primary and secondary schools were selected for stratified randomization from a full listing of schools participating in UNICEF’s Safe Schools program by UNICEF’s field assessment team.Within each selected school, research staff drew a simple random sample of students for activity participation (intervention or control) with the goal of a 20:1 student to instructor ratio. Based on instructor capacity in Lilongwe and Dedza, approximately 60 female students were selected for activity participation per school; in Salima where more staff were available, approximately 100 female students were selected per school. In most settings, participating classes included primary school classes 5, 6, 7, 8 and secondary school forms 1, 2, 3, 4. In Salima, Class 8 was not included in the selection pool based on retention concerns as many Class 8 students graduate. Sessions took place after school and were split as necessary for larger groups. Students within participating schools were blinded to intervention or control status. Within schools, simple random sampling was achieved by gathering participating school classes outside for circulation of an opaque plastic tin containing a pre-determined mix of beads specific to the size of each school. Students each selected a single bead; bead color red indicated random selection into the activities (intervention or control) underway at their school. In several schools, administrator concerns emerged regarding the use of red beads for random selection, and black instructor uniforms, which led to color modification for these procedures.Study population and retentionBaseline data was collected from February to June 2015 (See Fig. 1). Sample size was determined on the basis of implementation capacity. Follow-up data collection occurred from November 2015–May 2016. Follow-up data collection was not attempted in ten schools (5 Lilongwe, 4 Dedza, 1 Salima) based on the aforementioned administrator concerns; additionally students in Class 8 and Form 4 were not followed after completing school examinations; yielding an effective baseline sample of 6644 students. Follow-up data was obtained  for 3311 primary school students and 967 secondary school students (total n = 4278).Open in a separate windowFig. 1Participant flow chartIMPower intervention activitiesIMPower consists of weekly, 2-h sessions for 6 weeks for a total of 12 h of interactive, empowerment self-defense training. Because physical interventions can escalate situations of potential violence, IMPower emphasizes early recognition of boundary testing, negotiation, diffusion and distraction tactics, and verbal assertiveness over physical self-defense, with the guidance that physical tactics should only be used if they are the last and best option. IMpower teaches boundary recognition and boundary setting (e.g., name harmful behaviors, warn about consequences), negotiation and diffusion tactics, verbal assertiveness (e.g., yell if threatened), and physical defense skills, with the self-efficacy to implement these skills. The physical skills comprise closed target skills, weapons and targets. After the six weeks, two-hour refresher courses are performed every 3–6 months. IMPower was developed by No Means No Worldwide (NMNW), a US-based NGO. An extensive formative phase was conducted to adapt IMPower for the Malawi context. Following community sensitization and structured discussions with key stakeholders, program adaptations included an emphasis on verbal and negotiation skills, with clarification that a physical response, including physical self-defense, is a last resort in a situation of danger. IMPower instructors are carefully selected with preference for experience with youth and on issues of GBV, and capacity for teaching and community organizing. All instructors attend a 3-week, 126-h intensive training in Lilongwe. After certification, instructors are deployed, most often to their home districts, for a 6-month period of co-teaching with an experienced instructor, followed by independent teaching.Control condition activitiesStudents randomized to the control condition received the standard of care for youth in schools, specifically the Lifeskills program. This standard 2-h Malawian school program covers adolescent health topics including puberty, menstruation, hygiene, sex education, STIs/HIV, and pregnancy prevention. These students also received two-hour refresher classes at 3–6 months also focused on puberty and hygiene at 10.5 months, prior to completing follow-up surveys.Supporting sexual violence survivors: The SASA programIMPower participants who disclosed sexual violence during the program were referred to the Sexual Assault Survivors Anonymous (SASA) support program. This voluntary program offers weekly meetings with the goal of healing. From the IMPower program, 56 students in Lilongwe, 46 in Dedza, and 70 in Salima, were voluntarily linked to SASA support services.RandomizationThe unit of randomization was the school, to minimize risk of contamination given the intensity of the IMPower intervention. Within district, primary and secondary schools were grouped into blocks based on approximate size, and randomized within block to intervention or control conditions using SPSS (allocation ratio 1:1). Participants were assigned to intervention or control condition based on school. For logistical purposes regarding planning program duration, school administrators were aware of assignment to intervention condition prior to study implementation. While every effort was made to blind students and teachers to intervention arm, intervention status could have been inadvertently been revealed to teachers or students.Data collection proceduresInformed consent followed UNICEF guidelines. Teacher consent was undergone during the formative phase to allow classroom participation of students. Written consent was obtained from parents and students prior to participation in the program and evaluation research.Data collection procedures were designed to maximize confidentiality, in accordance with best practices for violence-related research [30]. No names or identifiers were collected. Participants self-administered baseline and follow-up surveys, aided by two instructors present in each class: one for reading the measures aloud and the other for monitoring the class to ensure confidentiality. Each question and answer choice was read aloud to the entire class in both English and Chichewa. Instructors from the local district were present to ensure that the district-specific dialect of Chichewa was used for survey administration, as terms vary by district. The students were given the opportunity to ask questions before selecting their own answer choice. To minimize deductive disclosure related to speed of survey completion, a response was required for each question, including “never had sex” or “never experienced sexual violence.” To maximize confidentiality, following survey completion, participants deposited their survey in a locked ballot box [31] to be taken directly to the research office, thus limiting the risk of instructors or data collectors inadvertently viewing responses. Students in both study arms had the option to self-refer to study staff and/or teachers for violence-related support and connection to local services.MeasuresAll measures were self-reported. They were adapted from prior evaluations of the IMPower program in Kenya [27, 28, 32] for comparability, and piloted in Malawian primary and secondary schools and with Chichewa-speaking instructor groups for feasibility and acceptability. Survey instruments were designed to maximize efficiency and feasibility for this demonstration study, as well as confidentiality. Primary outcomes were past year prevalence and past year incident rate of forced sex; for comparability with past evaluations. The forced sex outcome was assessed with a single item used for Kenya-based evaluations of IMPower [27, 28, 32], specifically, “Since you took the No Means No survey or in the past one year, have you ever been forced against your will to have sex (penetration of your vagina, anus or mouth with a man’s penis or another object)?” with a follow-up question “If so, how many times?”. School-level prevalence reflects the total number of participants who reported any forced sex over the referent period, divided by the total number of participants in the school. Incident rate was computed as mean number of forced sexual incidents per person-time within school, converted to adjust for time frame differences between the baseline (12 months) and follow-up period (10.5 months). Prevalence and disclosure outcomes are presented as proportions for interpretability; statistical inferences were robust in sensitivity analysis with time-adjusted estimates (data not shown).Intermediate outcomes were confidence, knowledge, and sexual violence disclosure. Confidence measures were developed specifically for IMPower, specifically, “If I am attacked by a bigger man I feel confident that I can defend myself” and “Is it okay to use force and even injure anyone who is known to me if he is forcing me to have sex and will not listen to me (e.g., brother, boyfriend, father, cousin)?” Knowledge pertained to the self-defense skills taught, specifically: “If I am grabbed by an attacker what should I use to free myself?” and “The main aim of self-defense is to?” Both confidence and knowledge were then transformed into scores—if students answered both questions correctly, they were considered to have “complete” knowledge or “high” confidence, respectively, with those answering only one or zero serving as the referent group. Disclosure of sexual violence was measured among girls who had experienced violence in the past year/since the baseline survey from the question “Did you tell anyone about it?” and analyzed dichotomously. Participants with past-year forced sex were asked to indicate perpetrator(s), which were aggregated into the following groups: boyfriend, friend, relative (including stepfather/father and brother), neighbor, known adult (comprising teacher, pastor, police, doctor, and imam), stranger (including gangster), and other perpetrator. Formative research documented presence of Chinamwali, a Malawian rite of passage that can include forced sex, undergone by adolescent girls at the start of puberty. Chinamwali experiences were assessed via “In some communities in Malawi girls attend/undergo chinamwali. Have you gone through chinamwali?” These items were the only measures unique to Malawi.AnalysisData were entered by a single individual and independently reviewed for accuracy by a second individual. The unit of analysis is the school level. We attempted anonymous matching of baseline and follow-up surveys for individual-level statistical analysis; participants self-created an identification code based on responses to questions for which only they would know the answer. The elements of the self-created identification codes proved suboptimal; for example, participants had limited knowledge regarding month and year of birth, and matching across time periods was poor. Individual-level baseline characteristics of participants by school type and intervention arm were compared using chi-squared statistics. Subsequent matching analyses and comparisons across time points were all done at the school-level given the suboptimal matching of individual-level data.To support aggregate analysis at the school level, baseline and follow-up data points were collapsed at the school level to obtain means and counts. The primary and intermediate endpoints included past-year sexual violence prevalence, past-year sexual violence incident rate (primary), disclosure of abuse, self-defense knowledge, and confidence (intermediate). Poisson regression with cluster-correlated robust variance estimates was used to estimate either risk ratios or incident rate ratios per student-month comparing intervention arms by time point. The model included arm, time point (baseline vs. endline), and time-arm interaction to test within-arm baseline to endline relative change. School size (or a product of school size by time period) was used as an offset term in the Poisson regression to constrain the coefficient to one and use it as the denominator for the risk and rates. Results were subsequently stratified by type of school (primary/secondary) and district. Additionally, perpetrator groups were compared between baseline and follow-up; p-values were estimated using generalized linear models with binomial distribution and logit link and school-correlated variance, using each type of perpetrator as the outcome. The sample size fluctuates slightly to accommodate small amounts of missing data.  All statistical analyses were conducted in STATA 14 (STATCORP. College Station, TX).All procedures were approved by the Malawi National Commission for Science and Technology (Ref. No. NCST/RTT/2/6). Johns Hopkins conducted post-hoc evaluation analysis with support from UNICEF, and received a non-human subject IRB determination given the anonymous nature of data. This trial was registered with Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (PACTR201702002028911) in February 2017; trial registry did not occur in advance of participant enrollment due to ambiguity on eligibility for trial registry given the applied (rather than clinical) nature of the study. Resource constraints prevented data collection on the pregnancy-related school dropouts initially proposed within the protocol as well as implementation of the companion programming for young men; thus the current analysis reports solely on sexual assault outcomes. The intervention promotes boundary setting through voice and action, with physical self-defense as a last resort. There are possible harms that could result from self-defense, including injury. No adverse events have been reported in past trials [27, 32] of this intervention. For this implementation trial, study staff were directed to immediately report any adverse events to the Ujamaa office; no adverse events were detected.
Results|Individual baseline characteristicsTable 1 disaggregates responses of the 5199 the primary school and 1445 secondary school students at baseline by intervention status and school type. Mean age of primary school students was 15.28 (SD = 2.06) and mean age of secondary school students was 19.55 (SD = 2.70). Salima district comprised approximately 50% of primary school students, whereas approximately 70% of secondary school students were from Lilongwe. Sixteen percent of primary school girls and 26% of secondary school girls had ever been forced to have sex. Prevalence of previous year forced sex was slightly lower than ever forced, with 10% of primary school girls and 18% of secondary school girls reporting forced sex victimization in the past year. Of girls who reported forced sex experiences at baseline, 49% of primary school girls reported only one incident within the past year, whereas 63% of secondary school girls reported multiple incidents.Table 1Baseline Characteristics by Intervention Group§Primary SchoolSecondary SchoolIntervention(n = 2491)n (%)Control(n = 2708)n (%)Overall (n = 5199)n (%)Intervention(n = 757)n (%)Control(n = 688)n (%)Overall (n = 1445)n (%)District Lilongwe702 (28.2)569 (21.0)1271 (24.5)*495 (65.4)497 (72.2)992 (68.7)* Dedza484 (19.4)654 (24.2)1138 (21.9)50 (6.6)59 (8.6)109 (7.5) Salima1305 (52.4)1485 (54.8)2790 (53.7)212 (28.0)132 (19.2)344 (23.8)School Class Class 5929 (37.7)1123 (41.8)2052 (39.8)*––– Class 6819 (33.2)849 (31.6)1668 (32.4)––– Class 7718 (29.1)712 (26.5)1430 (27.8)––– Form 1–––286 (37.8)242 (35.5)528 (36.7) Form 2–––225 (29.7)204 (30.0)429 (29.9) Form 3–––245 (32.4)235 (34.5)480 (33.4)Chinamwali Underwent721 (29.3)1022 (38.0)1743 (33.8)*240 (32.5)219 (32.1)459 (32.3) Did not undergo1742 (70.7)1667 (62.0)3409 (66.2)499 (67.5)464 (67.9)963 (67.7)Ever forced to have sex Yes407 (16.4)403 (14.9)810 (15.6)220 (29.3)154 (22.4)374 (26.0)* No2082 (83.7)2304 (85.1)4386 (84.4)531 (70.7)534 (77.6)1065 (74.0)Past year forced sex None2164 (90.3)2375 (90.6)4539 (90.4)584 (80.9)550 (82.8)1134 (81.8) 1 time120 (5.0)112 (4.3)232 (4.6)53 (7.3)41 (6.2)94 (6.8) 2 times47 (2.0)56 (2.1)103 (2.1)35 (4.9)43 (6.5)78 (5.6) 3 times******23 (3.2)15 (2.3)38 (2.7) 4+ times**52 (2.0)**27 (3.7)15 (2.3)42 (3.0)Open in a separate window§ Sample size fluctuates slightly to accommodate small amounts of missing data, *χ2 test significant at the 0.05 level, **cell with < 2% suppressedPrimary outcomesAcross all students, baseline past-year sexual violence was prevalent in both intervention (15.2%) and control arms (13.8%; Table 2). By follow-up, prevalence in the intervention arm dropped to 9.2%(Risk Ratio(RR)Intervention 0.59 [95% CI 0.49–0.72]), while control arm prevalence remained approximately steady at 14.5% (RRControl1.04[0.86–1.26]); interaction effect p-value < 0.001. Overall incident rates followed a similar trend; they were comparable at baseline (19.6 per 1000 student-months vs. 19.3 control arm), decreased significantly by follow-up in the intervention arm (16.3; Rate RatioIntervention = 0.82 [0.67–1.00]), and increased in the control arm (24.0; Rate RatioControl = 1.22[0.95–1.57].The overall interaction effect favored the intervention arm (p-value =0.01).Table 2Primary and secondary outcomes across intervention and control arms and intervention effects on changes from baseline to follow-upBaselineFollow-upDifference Baseline to Follow-upIntervention EffectInterventionControlInterventionControlInterventionControl% (95% CI)
(rate) (95% CI)
p-valuea% (95% CI)
(rate) (95% CI)
p-valueaRR(95% CI)p-valuebRR(95% CI)p-valuebp-valuecAll SchoolsPrimary outcomes Past year sexual violence prevalence15.2%(12.8–18.1)13.8%(11.6–16.3)0.419.2%(7.7–11.0)14.5%(12.0–17.6)
0.001

0.59

(0.49–0.72)

< 0.001
1.04(0.86–1.26)0.70
< 0.001
 School incident rated
(19.6)

(16.1–23.9)

(19.3)

(15.7–23.8)
0.92
(16.3)

(13.3–20.0)

(24.0)

(19.5–29.4)

0.01
0.82(0.67–1.00)
0.05
1.22(0.95–1.57)0.12
0.01
Intermediate outcomes High confidence41.2%(35.7–47.6)26.2%(22.8–30.2)
< 0.001
55.0%(50.1–60.3)33.2%(28.9–38.2)
< 0.001

1.33

(1.17–1.50)

< 0.001

1.26

(1.06–1.49)

0.01
0.63 Correct knowledge15.0%(12.0–18.8)7.0%(5.3–9.2)
< 0.001
50.4%(45.6–55.7)8.9%(6.8–11.8)
< 0.001

3.33

(2.76–4.02)

< 0.001
1.27(0.95–1.70)0.11
< 0.001
 Sexual violence disclosuree73.0%(67.4–79.1)68.2%(63.4–73.2)0.2183.7%(78.4–89.3)74.8%(70.8–79.1)
0.01

1.14

(1.04–1.26)

0.007

1.10

(1.01–1.19)

0.02
0.50Primary School Past year sexual violence prevalence13.0%(10.5–16.0)12.1%(10.5–14.1)0.627.5%(6.1–9.3)11.8%(9.9–14.1)
0.001

0.58

(0.45–0.74)

< 0.001
0.97(0.78–1.20)0.78
0.002
 School incident rated
(15.3)

(12.3–19.0)

(16.9)

(13.9–20.6)
0.50
(13.6)

(10.7–17.4)

(20.2)

(16.2–25.4)

0.02
0.88(0.71–1.11).291.20(0.88–1.62)0.250.12 High confidence37.1%(31.4–43.8)23.5%(19.9–27.8)
< 0.001
50.9%(45.5–57.0)29.2%(25.1–34.1)
< 0.001

1.37

(1.18–1.59)

< 0.001
1.24(1.00–1.54)0.050.46 Correct knowledge11.6%(8.9–15.1)5.3%(3.9–7.2)
< 0.001
45.7%(40.6–51.5)5.8%(4.2–8.0)
< 0.001

3.97

(3.15–5.00)

< 0.001
1.09(0.72–1.65)0.68
< 0.001
 Sexual violence disclosuree74.0%(67.2–81.6)69.1%(64.6–73.8)0.2584.7%(78.3–91.7)75.4%(70.2–81.0)
0.03

1.14

(1.01–1.28)

0.03

1.09

(1.00–1.19)

0.04
0.58Secondary School Past year sexual violence prevalence22.7%(17.5–29.4)20.1%(13.3–30.3)0.6215.1%(11.6–19.8)23.1%(16.5–32.4)
0.06

0.70

(0.54–0.91)

0.01
1.13(0.78–1.67)0.51
0.04
 School incident rated
(33.9)

(24.7–46.6)

(28.8)

(17.7–46.9)
0.59
(26.2)

(18.8–36.5)

(35.8)

(25.4–50.3)
0.200.82(0.56–1.19)0.291.23(0.78–1.94)0.380.18 High confidence54.8%(43.1–69.7)36.9%(30.6–44.5)
0.01
69.9%(63.5–77.0)46.0%(36.6–57.8)
0.001

1.30

(1.01–1.66)

0.04
1.24(0.96–1.61)0.100.82 Correct knowledge26.4%(19.8–35.3)13.5%(9.2–19.8)
0.01
67.8(61.9–74.3)18.9%(13.7–26.0)
< 0.001

2.57

(1.91–3.45)

< 0.001
1.40(0.93–2.09)0.11
0.02
 Sexual violence disclosuree71.1%(61.7–81.9)65.9%(54.5–79.8)0.5481.7%(72.7–91.8)73.9%(67.2–81.3)0.191.13(0.93–1.38)0.221.12(0.92–1.36)0.250.94Open in a separate windowaBetween-arm difference within time point; b Between-time point within arm ratio; c Between-arm between-time point ratio of ratios; d Per 1000 person-months; eAmong those affected (past year); boldface illustrates statistical significance at p < 0.05Secondary outcomesSubstantial differences in baseline self-defense confidence were seen across intervention and control groups (full confidence 41.2% vs. 26.2%, p < 0.001). Modest increases in confidence were observed for both intervention (RR = 1.33 [1.17–1.50]) and control (RR = 1.26[1.06–1.49]) groups; the interaction effect was not significant (p = 0.63). While baseline self-defense knowledge was slightly higher for the intervention than control group (full knowledge 15.0% vs. 7.0%, p < 0.001), knowledge increased three-fold in the intervention group by follow-up(RRintervention = 3.33[2.76–4.02]), with no significant difference was observed in the control arm (RRcontrol = 1.27[0.95–1.70]; interaction effect p-value < 0.001.Among those who experienced sexual violence in the past year, violence disclosure increased in both intervention and control groups (Intervention 73.0% vs 83.7%; RRIntervention = 1.14 [1.04–1.26], p = 0.007; Control 68.2% vs. 74.8%; RRControl = 1.10 [1.01–1.19], p = 0.02; resulting in an insignificant interaction effect (p = 0.50).Stratification by primary vs. secondary school and districtIn primary schools, past-year sexual violence prevalence decreased significantly in the intervention arm (baseline 13.0% vs. follow-up 7.5%; RRIntervention 0.58 [95% CI 0.45–0.74]), and remained steady in the control arm (12.1% vs. 11.8%; RRControl 0.97 [95% CI 0.78–1.20]); intervention effect p-value = 0.002. In primary schools, differences in sexual violence incident rates were not statistically significant, but in the direction of a decrease in the intervention arm and an increase in the control arm (Rate RatioIntervention = 0.88[0.71–1.11]; Rate RatioControl = 1.20[0.88–1.62]; overall interaction effect p-value = 0.12. Significant interaction effects were observed for self-defense knowledge (p < 0.001), while confidence and disclosure increased for both intervention and control arms with nonsignificant intervention interaction effects.In secondary schools, where past-year sexual violence was most prevalent at baseline (22.7% intervention, 20.1% control), prevalence similarly decreased significantly in the intervention arm (RRintervention = 0.70[0.54–0.91]) and remained unchanged in the control arm (RRcontrol = 1.13[0.78–1.67]); intervention effect p-value = 0.04). Differences in sexual violence incident rates were not statistically significant, though trended towards a reduction in intervention schools and an increase in control schools (Rate RatioIntervention = 0.82[0.56–1.19]; Rate RatioControl = 1.23[0.78–1.94]; overall interaction effect p-value = 0.18. Similar to primary schools, an interaction effect was observed for self-defense knowledge (p = 0.02), whereas confidence and disclosure increased for both arms with nonsignificant intervention interaction effects.In district-stratified analysis (data not shown), significant interaction effects (p < 0.05) were observed for sexual violence prevalence in Lilongwe and Salima districts. In Dedza, intervention impact was concentrated among secondary students (interaction effect p = 0.03). The lack of significant effect observed for primary students in Dedza may reflect statistical power issues stemming from the low baseline prevalence of sexual violence among Dedza primary students (8.3% intervention arm; 11.5% control arm), coupled with their somewhat smaller overall sample size.Perpetrator mixOverall, across intervention arms, time periods, and school levels, most sexual violence perpetrators were known to victims (Table 3). Boyfriends were the most common perpetrators for primary (34.5–45.4%) and secondary students (41.0–68.6%) across both intervention and control groups, followed by relatives, friends and neighbors. Only 9–15% of primary students affected by violence indicated strangers as perpetrators; < 1–9.5% among secondary students. Amongst the intervention group, the proportion of sexual assaults perpetrated by relatives decreased significantly from 21.0% at baseline to 9.8% at follow-up (p = 0.01). Perpetration by boyfriends, other known adults, and strangers held steady. Several changes in the control group were also noted during this time, including decreases in the proportion of assaults perpetrated by neighbors among those victimized. When stratified by school level, the decrease in relative-perpetrated violence was found concentrated among primary school students in the intervention arm (26.0 to 8.9%, p = 0.001). Among secondary school intervention arm students, there were no significant changes in sexual violence perpetrators, however in the control arm, a higher proportion of relatives and strangers were indicated as violence perpetrators at follow-up, while the proportion of boyfriends as perpetrators decreased from baseline to follow-up (68.6 to 41.0%; p = 0.004).Table 3Perpetrators* of past-year forced sex among those who experienced sexual violence at baseline and follow-up, respectively, by intervention statusInterventionControlBaseline (n = 452)n (%)Follow-Up (n = 194)n (%)p-valueaBaseline (n = 423)n (%)Follow-Up (n = 268)n (%)p-valueaAll Students Boyfriend203 (44.9)90 (46.4)0.46188 (44.4)117 (43.7)0.75 Friend51 (11.3)30 (15.5)0.1041 (9.7)33 (12.3)0.33 Relative95 (21.0)19 (9.8)
0.01
79 (18.7)57 (21.3)0.47 Neighbor37 (8.2)23 (11.9)0.1546 (10.9)13 (4.9)
0.01
 Known Adult24 (5.3)10 (5.2)0.9529 (6.9)16 (6.0)0.66 Stranger32 (7.1)21 (10.8)0.1028 (6.6)28 (10.5)0.19 Other10 (2.2)**0.1912(2.8)**0.21Primary School Only Boyfriend103 (35.6)45 (36.6)0.57103 (34.5)74 (45.4)
0.05
 Friend32 (11.1)24 (19.5)
0.02
32 (10.7)26 (16.0)0.15 Relative75 (26.0)11 (8.9)
0.001
62 (20.7)26 (16.0)0.08 Neighbor25 (8.7)18 (14.6)0.0839 (13.0)5 (3.1)
< 0.001
 Known Adult20 (6.9)6 (4.9)0.5925 (8.4)12 (7.4)0.68 Stranger29 (10.0)18 (14.6)0.1427 (9.0)18 (11.0)0.63 Other****0.5311 (3.7)**0.12Secondary School Only Boyfriend100 (61.4)45 (63.4)0.6185 (68.6)43 (41.0)
0.004
 Friend19 (11.7)6 (8.5)0.549 (7.3)7 (6.7)0.90 Relative20 (12.3)8 (11.3)0.9517 (13.7)31 (29.5)
0.001
 Neighbor12 (7.4)5 (7.0)0.997 (5.7)8 (7.6)0.42 Known Adult4 (2.5)4 (5.6)0.144 (3.2)4 (3.8)0.82 Stranger**3 (4.2)0.37**10 (9.5)
0.03
 Other5 (3.1)**
< 0.001
****0.32Open in a separate windowboldface illustrates statistical significance at p < 0.05*not mutually exclusive**cell with < 2% suppressedageneralized linear models with binomial distribution and logit link and school-correlated varianceSkills mixWithin the intervention group, 43% of girls said that they had used skills to stop forced sex since IMPower ESD training. Of the girls that used the skills, 49% used verbal only, 13% used physical only, and 38% used a combination of verbal and physical skills. Of those, 52% reported using the learned skills more than once to stop forced sex. The skills learned within IMPower extended beyond sexual violence prevention, with an additional 53% of girls reporting using the skills to stop harassment and 52% reporting using the skills to stop physical violence since the ESD training (data not shown).DisclosureThose who disclosed sexual violence were most likely to turn to friends (approximately 50% at both baseline and follow up), with fewer than 7% reporting to law enforcement (data not shown). While approximately 80% of girls disclosed their violence experience to someone, they chose to disclose to friends and other members of their informal networks, instead of police or medical professionals.
Discussion|Results from this cluster-randomized controlled implementation trial support the effectiveness of school-based, empowerment self-defense training as a promising strategy in reducing risk for sexual violence for girls in both primary and secondary schools in Malawi. Compared with control participants, students assigned to IMPower intervention reported reductions in past-year sexual violence from baseline to follow-up, and increases in self-defense-related knowledge. IMpower has been previously found effective in reducing sexual violence in the densely-populated urban settlements of Nairobi, Kenya [27, 28]; current findings provide a critical replication and extension of this work by demonstrating similar reductions in sexual assault prevalence, as well as increases in knowledge in self-defense, in the far more diffuse setting of Malawi (197.5 people/kmsq; 2017) [33],across a heterogeneity of districts, and across both primary and secondary school levels. Results provide timely direction for addressing the epidemic of sexual violence against young women in Malawi, where an estimated one in four young women experience sexual violence by the time of secondary school.Several potential mechanisms may underlie the reductions observed in sexual violence among ESD participation in this study, and in past evaluations [27, 28, 32]. The observed increases in self-defense knowledge in the intervention arm relative to controls, may in part explain the reductions in sexual violence. Empowerment and social cognitive theory would suggest knowledge as necessary but insufficient to change in health-related behavior, and would  suggest power, self-efficacy, or confidence as necessary to implement change. Surprisingly, confidence in responding to threatening situations increased in both intervention and control arms with no significant intervention effect observed. It is possible that our current measures, while tailored to IMpower content, were insufficiently sensitive to capture meaningful changes in confidence and empowerment resulting from the program. It is also possible that natural maturation is responsible for the observed increases in confidence across both arms. Our findings should be interpreted with caution given measurement limitations in assessing self-confidence (2 items), particularly given recent evidence from Nairobi, which showed increases in self-efficacy as assessed on a generalized scale, when IMpower was implemented in concert with programming for young men [32]. Finally, it is possible that IMpower shifted participants’ interpersonal power in ways that were perceived by potential sexual violence perpetrators and changed their behavior. Evaluating this mechanism would require community-level research, in addition to the participant data that has served as the basis for this and related studies.The vast majority of sexual violence perpetrators were known to victims, with boyfriends the most commonly reported perpetrators at baseline and follow-up, across primary and secondary schools and intervention and control groups. Results are consistent with past research in Malawi and globally indicating boyfriends, intimate partners and other acquaintances as leading perpetrators of violence against women [15, 34]. In the control arm, among secondary students, proportion of violence survivors reporting boyfriends as perpetrators decreased while proportion of survivors reporting relatives as perpetrators increased by follow-up. Intervention arm primary schools saw decreases in the proportion of survivor reporting relatives as perpetrators by follow-up. Further research, including qualitative inquiry, can help inform the ways in which this intervention may function differentially for different types of perpetrators. Differences observed in perpetrator mix at baseline and follow-up, however results should be interpreted with caution in that they represent the portion of survivors reporting a given perpetrator type rather than prevalence or incidents by perpetrator.Results should be considered in light of several additional limitations. As in past evaluations of this program [27, 28, 32], the inability to link individual surveys across baseline and follow-up constrains evaluation of mechanisms responsible for changes observed, and discernment of primary prevention (preventing new incidents among unaffected individuals) vs secondary prevention (reducing recurrent exposure among those who have experienced sexual violence). The evaluation’s emphasis on efficient survey data collection for this demonstration project prompted some measurement limitations. Most notably, we lack data on demographic characteristics that could be used to explore effects by specific groupings. Sexual violence assessment was limited to forced sex, which offers specificity yet overlooks non-consensual sexual experiences resulting from coercion, threats or pressure that did not rise to the level of physical force, and thus may underestimate the extent of sexual violence. Future research should also explore intervention effects on sexual harassment and  physical and emotional abuse, which were not assessed for time considerations. The relatively short follow-up duration limits our ability to understand the durability of findings. The self-reported nature of data, single-blind design with students, but not school or study staff, blind to intervention assignment, and instructor-led survey administration could introduce error or bias, despite the measures in place to enhance confidentiality and comfort. Our use of a past-year prevalence outcome for sexual violence is a limitation in precision for follow-up estimates given the 10.5 month length to follow-up; this imprecision is evenly distributed across intervention and control arms and is not likely to introduce bias. Statistical inferences were consistent in sensitivity analysis converted to adjust for time difference. While the IMpower program targets girls specifically, we note that sexual violence also affects young men [15]. Finally we note that while IMPower is designed to increase skills, confidence, and safety behavior in responding to sexual violence and potentially threatening situations, the ultimate behavioral responsibility for sexual violence prevention rests with perpetrators, not victims, of violence.
Conclusions|Our study adds to a limited evidence base on sexual violence prevention interventions that are effective across a diversity of settings, and address the needs of younger girls in particular. It is worth noting that this intervention has now been piloted and evaluated in two African countries, Kenya and Malawi, demonstrating efficacy across a diversity of cultural and social systems.Results support the effectiveness of ESD to address sexual violence in this high prevalence setting. ESD may aid Malawi and other signatory nations in meeting the obligations set forth by the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), and approach the goal of elimination of violence against women and girls set forth with Sustainable Development Goal #5. Implementation within the education system can enable sustainability and reach.
Acknoweldgements|The authors wish to thank the study participants, the school administrators and the Ujamaa research and program implementation staff.FundingUNICEF supported this program and its evaluation, and was involved in design and dissemination. We acknowledge statistical analysis support via the National Center for Research Resources and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) of the National Institutes of Health through Grant Number 1UL1TR001079.Availability of data and materialsData are available on reasonable request.
Abbreviations|CEDAWConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against WomenCIConfidence intervalESDEmpowerment self-defenseGBVGender-based violenceIRBInstitutional review boardLMICLow and middle-income countryNMNWNo means no worldwideRRRisk ratioSDStandard deviation
Authors’ contributions|MRD led data analysis, interpretation and writing. SNW conducted the literature search, implemented analysis plan, compiled figures, and assisted in data interpretation and manuscript preparation. EN participated in study design, led data collection including quality control, and participated in data analysis, interpretation and writing. GY directed the analysis plan, and participated in data interpretation and writing. JS, NM, BR, and BO participated in study design, data interpretation, and reviewed the manuscript for critical input. MN led study design, data collection, data analysis, and data interpretation, and reviewed the manuscript for critical input. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Notes|Ethics approval and consent to participateAll procedures were approved by the Malawi National Commission for Science and Technology (Ref. No. NCST/RTT/2/6); post-hoc evaluation analysis conducted by Johns Hopkins received a non-human subject IRB determination given the anonymous nature of data. Participants provided written consent.Consent for publicationN/ACompeting interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Publisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Contributor Information|Michele R. Decker, Phone: 1.410.502.2747, Email: ude.uhj@rekcedm.Shannon N. Wood, Email: ude.uhj@doows.Esther Ndinda, Email: moc.liamg@hadnid.rehtse.Gayane Yenokyan, Email: ude.uhj@1ykoneyg.Jacob Sinclair, Email: moc.liamg@dmrialcnisekaj.Nankali Maksud, Email: gro.fecinu@duskamn.Brendan Ross, Email: gro.fecinu@ssorb.Benjamin Omondi, Email: moc.liamg@ayobmidnomo.Martin Ndirangu, Email: moc.liamg@83nitramugnaridn.
Abstract|It has been reported that ACE2 is the main host cell receptor of 2019-nCoV and plays a crucial role in the entry of virus into the cell to cause the final infection. To investigate the potential route of 2019-nCov infection on the mucosa of oral cavity, bulk RNA-seq profiles from two public databases including The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Functional Annotation of The Mammalian Genome Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (FANTOM5 CAGE) dataset were collected. RNA-seq profiling data of 13 organ types with para-carcinoma normal tissues from TCGA and 14 organ types with normal tissues from FANTOM5 CAGE were analyzed in order to explore and validate the expression of ACE2 on the mucosa of oral cavity. Further, single-cell transcriptomes from an independent data generated in-house were used to identify and confirm the ACE2-expressing cell composition and proportion in oral cavity. The results demonstrated that the ACE2 expressed on the mucosa of oral cavity. Interestingly, this receptor was highly enriched in epithelial cells of tongue. Preliminarily, those findings have explained the basic mechanism that the oral cavity is a potentially high risk for 2019-nCoV infectious susceptibility and provided a piece of evidence for the future prevention strategy in dental clinical practice as well as daily life.
Introduction|Since December 2019, an increasing number of patients with pneumonia occurred in Wuhan, Hubei province, China, which attracted much attention not only within China but across the world1,2. The novel pneumonia was named as Corona Virus Disease 19 (COVID-19) by World Health Organization (WHO) (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200211-sitrep-22-ncov.pdf?sfvrsn=fb6d49b1_2), the common symptoms of COVID-19 at illness onset were fever, fatigue, dry cough, myalgia, and dyspnea3. In addition, some patients might suffer from headache, dizziness, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting3. Onset of disease may lead to progressive respiratory failure due to alveolar damage and even death4.Scientists then isolated a novel coronavirus from human airway epithelial cells, which was named 2019-nCoV5. Lu et al.6 found that 2019-nCoV was closer to bat-SL-CoVZC45 and bat-SL-CoVZXC21 at the whole-genome level, and the external subdomain of the 2019-nCoV receptor-binding domain (RBD) was more similar to that of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus (SARS-CoV). Study of Zhou et al.4 indicated that the angiotensin-converting enzyme II (ACE2) is likely the cell receptor of 2019-nCoV, which were also the receptor for SARS-CoV and HCoV-NL637,8. Zhou et al.4 also proved that 2019-nCoV does not use other coronavirus receptors, aminopeptidase N, and dipeptidyl peptidase 4. The study of Xu et al.9 found that the RBD domain of the 2019-nCoV S-protein supports strong interaction with human ACE2 molecules. These findings suggest that the ACE2 plays an important role in cellular entry, thus ACE2-expressing cells may act as target cells and are susceptible to 2019-nCoV infection10.The expression and distribution of the ACE2 in human body may indicate the potential infection routes of 2019-nCoV. Through the developed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) technique and single-cell transcriptomes based on the public database, researchers analyzed the ACE2 RNA expression profile at single-cell resolution. High ACE2 expression was identified in type II alveolar cells (AT2) of lung10,11,12, esophagus upper and stratified epithelial cells, absorptive enterocytes from ileum and colon12, cholangiocytes13, myocardial cells, kidney proximal tubule cells, and bladder urothelial cells10. These findings indicated that those organs with high ACE2-expressing cells should be considered as potential high risk for 2019-nCoV infection10.In order to investigated the potential routes of 2019-nCov infection on the mucosa of oral cavity, we explored whether the ACE2 is expressed and the ACE2-expressing cell composition and proportion in oral cavity based on the public bulk RNA-seq profiles from two public databases and single-cell transcriptomes from an independent data generated in-house. The result showed that the ACE2 could be expressed in the oral cavity, and was highly enriched in epithelial cells. Moreover, among different oral sites, ACE2 expression was higher in tongue than buccal and gingival tissues. These findings indicate that the mucosa of oral cavity may be a potentially high risk route of 2019-nCov infection.
Results|Public bulk RNA-seq dataset analysisNA-seq profile data of 13 organs including 695 para-carcinoma normal tissues as control from public TCGA were obtained for our analysis, and Fig. 1a showed that ACE2 could be expressed in various organs, the mean expression of different organs could be found in Table 1. According to the mean expression of ACE2, the mucosa of oral cavity could express ACE2, and the results were validated by the data of normal tissues from the FANTOM5 CAGE dataset (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1Bulk RNA-seq analysis of public datasets. a Violin plot of ACE2 expression in para-carcinoma normal tissues from TCGA, colored by organs. b Bar plot of ACE2 expression in normal tissues from FANTOM5 CAGE dataset, colored by organs. c Bar plot of ACE2 expression of para-carcinoma normal tissues from TCGA in different oral sites, colored by oral sites; d Boxplot of ACE2 in two kinds of oral sites from TCGA, colored by oral sitesFull size imageTable 1 Sample size and ACE2 expression of para-carcinoma normal tissues in different organsFull size tableTo investigate the ACE2 expression on mucosa of oral cavity, we looked into the ACE2 expression in different oral sites. According to the site information provided by the TCGA, among the 32 adjacent normal tissues, 13 tissues located in the oral tongue, 2 tissues located in the base of tongue, 3 tissues located in the floor of mouse, and 14 tissues did not definite the site and were just put into the category of oral cavity. The mean expression distribution of different sites was shown in Fig. 1c. When we combined the base of tongue, floor of mouth and oral cavity as other sites, and compared them with oral tongue, we found the obvious tendency that the mean expression of ACE2 was higher in oral tongue (13 tissues) than others (19 tissues) (Fig. 1d), while may due to the limitation of the sample size, the p value was not significant (P = 0.062).Single cell RNA-seq analysis of oral tissuesSingle cell RNA-seq was utilized for four oral tissues, and the data was analyzed to confirm the above results and assess the cell type-specific expression of ACE2. After the data preprocessing (shown in section “Materials and methods”), 22 969 cells were acquired and 7 cell types were identified (Fig. 2a), including epithelial cells (marker genes including SFN, KRT6A, and KRT10), fibroblasts (marker genes including FAP, PDPN, COL1A2, DCN, COL3A1, COL6A1), T cells (marker genes including CD2, CD3D, CD3E, and CD3G), macrophages (marker genes including CD163, CSF1R, CD68, and FCGR2A), mast cells (marker genes including CMA1, MS4A2, TPSAB1, TPSB2), B cells (marker genes including SLAMF7, FCRL5, and CD79A) and endothelial cells (marker genes including PECAM1, VWF, and ENG). The heatmap of main cell markers across the cell types can be found in Fig. 2b.Fig. 2Single cell RNA-seq analysis of oral tissues from independent dataset. a Seven-cell types were identified by the cell markers; cells were clustered by UMAP method. b Heatmap of cell markers for identifying cell types. c Scatter plots of all the cells with ACE2 expression. d Violin plot of ACE2 expression across different oral sites. e Violin plot of ACE2 expression across different cell types. f Scatter plots of tongue epithelial cells with ACE2 expressionFull size imageAccording to Fig. 2c, d, we confirmed the ACE2 was expressed in oral tissues (0.52% ACE2-positive cells), and higher in oral tongue than buccal and gingival tissues (95.86% ACE2-positive cells located in oral tongue). Figure 2e shows that the ACE2-positive cells could be found in oral tissues including epithelial cells (1.19% ACE2-positive cells), T cells (<0.5%), B cells (<0.5%), and fibroblast (<0.5%), and the ACE2 was highly enriched in epithelial cells, of which 93.38% ACE2-positive cells belong to epithelial cells (Fig. 2f). The above results indicated that the ACE2 could be expressed on the epithelial cells of the oral mucosa and highly enriched in tongue epithelial cells.
Discussion|In the last two decades, coronavirus has caused two large-scale pandemics, SARS in 2002 and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 201214. In December 2019, a novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) induced an outbreak of pneumonia in Wuhan, China, restated the risk of coronaviruses posed to public health15. The infection routes and pathogenesis of 2019-nCov are not fully understood by far, and the study of 2019-nCoV host cell receptor ACE2 could be valuable for the prevention and treatment of the COVID-19.In this study, the analysis of public bulk-seq RNA datasets showed that the mucosa of oral cavity could express the ACE2 and was higher in tongue than other oral sites. The results of this study were consistent with the study of Zou et al.10 in general, many organs with higher expression of ACE2 than lung, such as intestine, heart, and kidney. According to the study of Zhao et al.11, the ACE2 expression in lung is concentrated in a small population of type II alveolar cells (AT2), that may cause the relatively low ACE2 expression of lung in bulk-seq RNA datasets analysis. Even though, the result of Zou et al. indicated that the respiratory tract should also be considered as a vulnerable target to 2019-nCoV infection10.The results of our single cell RNA-seq profiles validated the ACE2 expression in oral cavity, and the level of ACE2 expression in oral tissues was higher in tongue than buccal or gingival tissues. Furthermore, we have also demonstrated that the ACE2-positive cells were enriched in epithelial cells, which was also reported by previous study10,11,12,16. These findings indicated that oral cavity could be regarded as potentially high risk for 2019-nCov infectious susceptibility.Interestingly, we found that the ACE2 also expressed in lymphocytes within oral mucosa, and similar results were found in various organs of the digestive system and in lungs11,12. Whether those facts have reminded the 2019-nCoV attacks the lymphocytes and leads to the severe illness of patients needs more in vitro and in vivo evidence and validations, though the proportion of ACE2-positive lymphocytes is quite small.Previous studies have investigated the ACE2 mRNA and protein expression in various tissues by bulk samples17,18, however, the distribution of ACE2 through bulk data could not indicate the cell type-specific expression of ACE2. Recently developed single-cell RNA-sequencing technology enabled the generation of vast amounts of the transcriptomic data at cellular resolution19. The ACE2 expression profile in various organs, tissues, and cell types, provides the bioinformatics evidence for the potential infection routes of 2019-nCov, which might also be associated with presented symptoms.Although studies have reported multiple symptoms of hospitalized patients with 2019-nCoV infection3,20, some cases at home might be asymptomatic. It is worth noting that, a previous study showed that 99% of the patients had no clinical manifestation of oral human papillomavirus (HPV), but HPV DNA was detected in 81% of oral mucosa samples, and anti-HPV IgA was detected in the saliva of 44% of the patients21. Likewise, although 2019-ncov infection hardly presented oral symptoms, the ACE2 expression in the oral cavity indicated that the oral infection route of 2019-nCoV cannot be excluded. Moreover, a latest pilot experiment showed that 4 out of 62 stool specimens tested positive to 2019-nCoV, and another four patients in a separate cohort who tested positive to rectal swabs had the 2019-nCoV being detected in the gastrointestinal tract, saliva, or urine20. Thus, our results support that in addition to the respiratory droplets and direct contact, fecal–oral transmission might also be the route of transmission of 2019-nCoV.Our results are mainly based on public datasets and single cell RNA-sequencing data of in-house oral tissues with minimal diseased lesion which from our previous project found no significant expression difference among the common epithelial markers in our past study and other previous study22,23,24. It is warrant that further histological methods are used to confirm our results and enhance the persuasion of the conclusion.The ACE2-expressing cells in oral tissues, especially in epithelial cells of tongue, might provide possible routes of entry for the 2019-nCov, which indicate oral cavity might be a potential risk route of 2019-nCov infection. Those preliminary findings have explained the basic mechanism that the oral cavity is a potentially high risk for 2019-nCoV infectious susceptibility and provide a piece of evidence for the future prevention strategy in clinical practice as well as daily life.
Materials and methods|Public datasets acquisition and analysisBulk RNA-seq data of para-carcinoma normal tissues which were taken as control tissues in the studies were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; https://www.cancer.gov/tcga), and 695 para-carcinoma normal tissues distributed in different organs were obtained for this study, which included intestine (51 tissues), kidney (129 tissues), stomach (35 tissues), bile duct (9 tissues), liver (50 tissues), oral cavity (32 tissues), lung (110 tissues), thyroid (59 tissues), esophagus (11 tissues), bladder (19 tissues), breast (113 tissues), uterus (25 tissues), and prostate (52 tissues). The RNA-seq data were batch effects normalized and log2-transformed for the subsequent analysis. Violin plot was used to show the distribution of ACE2 expression among different organs, t test was performed to compare the ACE2 expression between two different groups shown in boxplot.Besides, Bulk RNA-seq data of normal tissues were downloaded from Functional Annotation of The Mammalian Genome Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (FANTOM5 CAGE) dataset25, as only two samples of this dataset which owns 60 samples in total located in the tongue, we just downloaded 14 organ types to validate the ACE2 expression in oral cavity with bar plot, including colon, ovary, breast, cerebellum, epididymis, esophagus, gallbladder, heart muscle, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, prostate, and tongue.All analyses were performed in R (R version 3.6.0) and significant level was set as 0.05.Oral tissues of in-house cohortDue to our previous project about oral potential malignant disorders, four tissues of oral mucosa were obtained from patients after informed consent and ethical approval from West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University. These oral tissues had been sent for single cell RNA sequence. The four were taken from three patients with an average age of 50, which were all diagnosed as hyperkeratosis without dysplasia by pathologists, just showing an increase in cell number in the spinous layer and/or in the basal/parabasal cell layers without cellular atypia, and its genetic profiles would be much more closed to normal tissue than malignant tissue22,23,24. Two tissues were from independent lesions of one patient’s dorsum linguae. The other two tissues came from buccal and gingival sites.Tissue dissociation from fresh biopsiesFresh biopsy tissues were washed twice by D-PBS (Hyclone) and collected into prechilled MACS Tissue Storage Solution (Miltenyi). Single-cell suspensions were generated from biopsy tissues using Whole Skin Dissociation Kit human (Miltenyi) manufacturer guidelines and filtered by 70 μm MACS Smartstrainers (Miltenyi). Carryover red blood cells were lysed by Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (Abcam) and dead cells were removed by Easysep Dead Cell Removal (Annexin V) Kit (STEMCELL). Finally, cell pellets were re-suspended in D-PBS.Single cell RNA-sequencing library preparationTo generate single-cell Gel Beads-in-Emulsion (GEMs), the 10× chromium platform was used to capture and barcode cells. Cells were partitioned into GEMs along with gel beads coated with oligonucleotides and cDNAs with both barcodes were amplified, and a library was constructed using the 10× Genomics Chromium Single Cell Kit (v3 chemistry) for each sample. The resulting libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 System.Single cell RNA-seq data preprocessing and analysisThe FASTQ files were analyzed with the Cell Ranger Software Suite (version 3.1; 10× Genomics). The Seurat (version 3.0) was applied to read the gene-barcode matrix of four tissues. To control quality, we removed cells with <200 genes and 500 UMI counts, and as well as the cells with mitochondrial content higher than 5%. Besides, the genes detected in <3 cells were filtered out. The “sctransform” wrapper in Seurat was applied to normalize the data and remove confounding sources of variation, the “IntegrateData” was used for integrated the Seurat objects from four tissues. The uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) was used for dimensionality reduction and clustering the cells, cell types were assigned based on their canonical markers. UMAP plots, heatmap, and violin plots were generated with Seurat in R.
Acknowledgements|This study was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81520108009, 81991502, 81771081, and 81991500), the 111 Project of MOE (B14038), China.
Author information|Author notesThese authors contributed equally: Hao Xu, Liang Zhong, Jiaxin DengAffiliationsState Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Research Unit of Oral Carcinogenesis and Management, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, ChinaHao Xu, Liang Zhong, Jiaxin Deng, Jiakuan Peng, Hongxia Dan, Xin Zeng, Taiwen Li & Qianming ChenAuthorsHao XuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarLiang ZhongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJiaxin DengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJiakuan PengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarHongxia DanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarXin ZengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarTaiwen LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarQianming ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsH.X., TW.L. and QM.C. contributed equally by conceiving and designing the study. H.X., JX.D., L.Z., JK.P., HX.D., X.Z. and TW.L. performed the tissue collection, experiments, and analyzed the data. H.X., JX.D., L.Z., TW.L. and QM.C. wrote the paper.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to
                Taiwen Li.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Rights and permissions|
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleXu, H., Zhong, L., Deng, J. et al. High expression of ACE2 receptor of 2019-nCoV on the epithelial cells of oral mucosa.
                    Int J Oral Sci 12, 8 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41368-020-0074-xDownload citationReceived: 13 February 2020Revised: 15 February 2020Accepted: 15 February 2020Published: 24 February 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41368-020-0074-x
Further reading|g





                  Smell and taste alterations in COVID‐19: a cross‐sectional analysis of different cohorts
                


Alberto Paderno, Alberto Schreiber, Alberto Grammatica, Elena Raffetti, Michele Tomasoni, Tommaso Gualtieri, Stefano Taboni, Silvia Zorzi, Davide Lombardi, Alberto Deganello, Luca Oscar Redaelli De Zinis, Roberto Maroldi & Davide Mattavelli

International Forum of Allergy & Rhinology
                (2020)
              




                  Gustatory dysfunctions in COVID-19
                


Jerome R. Lechien, Julien W. Hsieh, Tareck Ayad, Nicolas Fakhry, Stephane Hans, Carlos M. Chiesa-Estomba & Sven Saussez

European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology
                (2020)
              




                  Beware: Gastrointestinal symptoms can be a manifestation of COVID-19
                


M. Schmulson, M.F. Dávalos & J. Berumen

Revista de Gastroenterología de México (English Edition)
                (2020)
              




                  Response to: Cardiac drugs and outcome in COVID-19
                


M R Goldstein, G A Poland & C W Graeber

QJM: An International Journal of Medicine
                (2020)
              




                  Response to: Use of statins in patients with COVID-19
                


M R Goldstein, G A Poland & C W Graeber

QJM: An International Journal of Medicine
                (2020)
              




Abstract|The vagaries of history lead to the prediction that repeated instances of evolutionary diversification will lead to disparate outcomes even if starting conditions are similar. We tested this proposition by examining the evolutionary radiation of Anolis lizards on the four islands of the Greater Antilles. Morphometric analyses indicate that the same set of habitat specialists, termed ecomorphs, occurs on all four islands. Although these similar assemblages could result from a single evolutionary origin of each ecomorph, followed by dispersal or vicariance, phylogenetic analysis indicates that the ecomorphs originated independently on each island. Thus, adaptive radiation in similar environments can overcome historical contingencies to produce strikingly similar evolutionary outcomes.
Abstract|BackgroundPosttraumatic stress disorder is a prevalent mental health condition with substantial impact on daily functioning that lacks sufficient treatment options. Here we evaluate six phase 2 trials in a pooled analysis to determine the study design for phase 3 trials of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for PTSD.MethodsSix randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical trials at five study sites were conducted from April 2004 to February 2017. Active doses of MDMA (75–125 mg, n = 72) or placebo/control doses (0–40 mg, n = 31) were administered to individuals with PTSD during manualized psychotherapy sessions in two or three 8-h sessions spaced a month apart. Three non-drug 90-min therapy sessions preceded the first MDMA exposure, and three to four followed each experimental session.ResultsAfter two blinded experimental sessions, the active group had significantly greater reductions in CAPS-IV total scores from baseline than the control group [MMRM estimated mean difference (SE) between groups − 22.0 (5.17), P < 0.001]. The between-group Cohen’s d effect size was 0.8, indicating a large treatment effect. After two experimental sessions, more participants in the active group (54.2%) did not meet CAPS-IV PTSD diagnostic criteria than the control group (22.6%). Depression symptom improvement on the BDI-II was greatest for the active group compared to the control group, although only trended towards significant group differences [MMRM, estimated mean difference (SE) between groups − 6.0 (3.03), P = 0.053]. All doses of MDMA were well tolerated, with some expected reactions occurring at greater frequency for the active MDMA group during experimental sessions and the 7 days following.ConclusionsMDMA-assisted psychotherapy was efficacious and well tolerated in a large sample of adults with PTSD. These studies supported expansion into phase 3 trials and led to FDA granting Breakthrough Therapy designation for this promising treatment.Trial registrationClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: {"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT00090064","term_id":"NCT00090064"}}NCT00090064, {"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT00353938","term_id":"NCT00353938"}}NCT00353938, {"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT01958593","term_id":"NCT01958593"}}NCT01958593, {"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT01211405","term_id":"NCT01211405"}}NCT01211405, {"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT01689740","term_id":"NCT01689740"}}NCT01689740, {"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT01793610","term_id":"NCT01793610"}}NCT01793610.Electronic supplementary materialThe online version of this article (10.1007/s00213-019-05249-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.Keywords: MDMA, MDMA-assisted psychotherapy, Posttraumatic stress disorder, Anxiety, Psychedelic
Introduction|Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a serious debilitating disorder with lifetime prevalence estimated at nearly 4% globally and over 8% in the USA (Kilpatrick et al. 2013; Koenen et al. 2017). Symptoms of PTSD include intrusive thoughts and memories, negative effects on cognition and mood, hyperarousal and reactivity, and avoidance that do not remit for at least 1 month subsequent to exposure to a traumatic event (Koenen et al. 2017). Individuals with PTSD may experience a substantial reduction in quality of life and relationships, and the disability resulting from PTSD can have further negative consequences such as obesity (Scott et al. 2008), hypertension (Kibler et al. 2009), comorbid mental health conditions, and suicidality (Dorrington et al. 2014; Tarrier and Gregg 2004). In addition to these profound costs to individuals with PTSD, the disorder also exerts a substantial economic toll through lost productivity and treatment costs (Marshall et al. 2000).Widely used treatments for PTSD include psychotherapies and medications. A recent review identified trauma-focused psychotherapies as first-line treatments for PTSD (Lee et al. 2016); however, while a substantial proportion of individuals with PTSD respond to psychotherapies [e.g., cognitive processing therapy (Monson et al. 2006; Resick et al. 2008) and prolonged exposure therapy (Foa et al. 2007)], these therapies may be difficult to access and are ineffective for many (Koenen et al. 2017; Steenkamp et al. 2015). A variety of medications have also been used to address PTSD symptoms, but only two drugs—sertraline and paroxetine—are approved by the FDA for PTSD. Extant pharmacotherapies, however, are ineffective for many individuals with PTSD, with an estimated 40–60% of patients not responding adequately (Bradley et al. 2005; Brady et al. 2000; Steenkamp et al. 2015). They may have problematic side effects and generally require long-term use to maintain effectiveness (Lee et al. 2016). In sum, the sizable proportion of cases of PTSD are persistent (Koenen et al. 2017) and the shortcomings of currently available treatments make the development of novel PTSD treatments a research priority.A promising approach to the treatment of PTSD is the combination of psychotherapy with pharmacotherapy using 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). Interest in the therapeutic potential of MDMA for trauma-related psychopathology developed in the context of the broader potential for MDMA to catalyze psychotherapeutic processes by facilitating communication and connection between therapists and patients (Nichols 1986). MDMA was first synthesized in 1912 by Merck, but it was not until the early 1970s that MDMA was first used in combination with psychotherapy. Case reports from that period described therapeutic benefits, although no clinical trials were conducted at that time. Recreational use of “Ecstasy,” tablets purported to contain MDMA, became popular in the 1980s, leading to its classification as a Schedule 1 controlled substance in 1985. The scheduling of MDMA made its use in therapy illegal and created obstacles to clinical research. A non-profit organization, the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS), filed a Drug Master File (DMF) application in 1986, followed by an Investigational New Drug (IND) application in 2001, embarking on the FDA drug development process to study the safety and efficacy of MDMA as an adjunct to psychotherapy for PTSD (Greer and Tolbert 1986; Grof 2001; Mithoefer 2011, 2017; Mithoefer et al. 2018).After nonclinical toxicity studies and an investigator-initiated phase 1 study of MDMA were completed (Frith et al. 1987; Grob et al. 1996, 1998), six phase 2 randomized trials of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for treatment of PTSD were conducted from 2004 to 2017. Active doses of MDMA (75–125 mg) or control doses of inactive placebo or low-dose MDMA (25–40 mg) were combined with manualized inner-directed psychotherapy (Mithoefer 2017) in which participants were supported by a male and female therapy team (Mithoefer et al. 2011, 2018). The therapeutic model described in the Treatment Manual was based upon initial work with classic psychedelics (Grof 2001; Mithoefer 2017) and early reports of MDMA in a therapeutic setting (Greer and Tolbert 1986). Four of these MAPS-sponsored studies have been published (Mithoefer et al. 2011, 2013, 2018; Oehen et al. 2013; Ot’alora et al. 2018), and all six studies demonstrated acceptable safety and promising efficacy results. The MDMA doses selected for phase 2 trials (control—0 mg, 25 mg, 30 mg, 40 mg; active—75 mg, 100 mg, 125 mg) were based on tolerability and subjective effects reported in several prior phase 1 studies (Cami et al. 2000; de la Torre et al. 2000; Grob et al. 1998; Harris et al. 2002; Liechti et al. 2001). Low doses (25 mg, 30 mg, 40 mg) produce some changes in subjective effects that could presumably enhance blinding as an active placebo but would be inadequate for a therapeutic response (Harris et al. 2002). The FDA, after reviewing all available data in 2016, granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation in 2017 and approved the designs of two phase 3 trials that started in 2018.To optimize the design of the phase 3 trials, we pooled data from six phase 2 trials that had similar study objectives and designs. We aimed to determine how many MDMA sessions are needed to achieve a clinically significant response, what demographic and other baseline variables might impact outcomes, which safety parameters are essential, the optimal dose, and how best to minimize bias and enhance blinding. To that end, the aim of this paper is to present pooled data from randomized clinical trials at different study sites that evaluated the efficacy and safety profile of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy among individuals with PTSD from a range of causes.
Methods|SettingSix randomized, double-blind phase 2 studies took place at five sites. The sites were located in the USA (MP-1, MP-8, MP-12), Canada (MP-4), Switzerland (MP-2), and Israel (MP-9). Five sites were private practices and one was a psychiatric clinic. Data were collected from April 2004 to March 2017. Studies were approved by the Western-Copernicus Institutional Review Board (Research Triangle or Cary, NC; MP-1, MP-8, MP-12), IRB Services/Chesapeake (Aurora ON; MP-4), Ethics Committee of Solothurn (Switzerland; MP-2), and Helsinki Committee of Beer Yaakov Hospital (Israel; MP-9).The authors assert that all procedures contributing to this work comply with the ethical standards of the relevant national and institutional committees on human experimentation and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008.ParticipantsParticipants were recruited through internet advertisements, referrals by health professionals, and by word of mouth. Candidates had chronic PTSD with symptoms lasting longer than 6 months and Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-IV (CAPS-IV) scores ≥ 50 (all studies except MP-4) or ≥ 60 (MP-4) upon enrollment (see eTable 1 for individual study criteria). Studies enrolled men and women, including civilians and veterans/first responders, aged 18 and older with previous inadequate response to at least one pharmacotherapy and/or psychotherapy. An inadequate response to previous treatment was concluded if participants had a CAPS-IV total score indicating moderate to extreme PTSD at screening.Participants underwent extensive screening by independent examiners, including psychological assessments, physical examinations, laboratory testing, and ECG to identify any possible contraindications to receiving MDMA. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders—Research Version (SCID-I-RV) or the SCID-II was used during screening to detect comorbid disorders, and medical and therapy records from outside providers were reviewed. Participants were not excluded for meeting criteria for anxiety disorders or depression but were excluded if they met criteria for past or current psychotic disorder or Bipolar Disorder 1, or for current borderline personality disorder, or eating disorder with active purging. Other exclusion criteria included significant medical diagnoses (contraindications for MDMA), pregnancy or lactation, and weight under 48 kg. Cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease was excluded, except in one study where candidates with well-controlled hypertension and no other evidence of vascular disease could enroll after additional screening with nuclear stress test and carotid ultrasound. All therapists maintained a Basic Life Support certification, and a study physician was available by telephone throughout the study. In order to be enrolled, individuals had to meet all inclusion/exclusion criteria and agree to comply with all planned study visits. All participants confirmed comprehension of study procedures and gave written informed consent.Participants could not have a diagnosis of substance abuse disorders within 60 days of screening for five studies and within 6 months for one study. Psychiatric medications were tapered and discontinued prior to commencing experimental sessions. Anxiolytics and sedative hypnotics were used as-needed between experimental sessions.Protocols and treatmentsAfter screening and enrollment, participants were randomized through a web-based system (MP-8, MP-12) or a list generated by a blinded randomization monitor (MP-1, MP-2, MP-4, MP-9) to receive blinded doses of placebo/control (0 mg placebo; 25 mg, 30 mg, or 40 mg MDMA) or active doses of MDMA (75 mg, 100 mg, or 125 mg MDMA) at approximately 1:2 ratio. Doses were administered during two 8-h psychotherapy sessions spaced 3–5 weeks apart. The initial dose was followed approximately 1.5–2.5 h later by an optional supplemental dose equal to half the initial dose. Participants could accept or decline the supplemental dose, and could discuss the choice with the therapy team. The team could withhold the supplemental dose if there were contraindicating circumstances. Participants underwent two to three non-drug 90-min therapy sessions prior to the first experimental session. Fifty participants who received 100 mg or 125 mg had a third experimental session, either open label or blinded depending on the study, and one 75 mg participant had a blinded third session before a protocol amendment changed the crossover to occur after two sessions. The control groups subsequently had the option to receive two to three open-label sessions with active dose MDMA in a crossover segment (data not shown). MDMA was synthesized by David Nichols at Purdue University. Gelatin capsules were compounded with lactose to produce equivalent-weight capsules across dose groups.The same male/female therapy team was present for all therapy sessions for a given participant. There were 18 therapy teams across the six studies. All but one team (MP-2) were trained in the MAPS Therapy Training Program based on the method described in the MDMA-assisted Psychotherapy Treatment Manual (Mithoefer 2017). The method includes periods of introspection alternating with periods of communication between therapists and the participant. The method is aimed at allowing participants to revisit traumatic experiences while staying emotionally engaged even during intense feelings of anxiety, pain, or grief without feeling overwhelmed. The relatively non-directive approach is intended to allow for processing of other psychological, interpersonal, or behavioral aspects of the participants’ lives that are likely to arise spontaneously in addition to processing the traumatic memories that led to PTSD.Experimental sessions took place in a designated area that contained a futon or sofa, as well as artwork or other objects intended to make the space esthetically pleasing. Participants had the option of wearing eye shades and listening to mostly instrumental music during the parts of experimental sessions when they were focused inward. After the 8-h experimental sessions, participants remained at the study site overnight with a supportive attendant. On the following day, they met with the therapists in a 90-min integration session to address and process material that arose during the experimental session. Two to three more integration sessions occurred during the month after each experimental session. For 7 days following each experimental session, the therapy team checked in with the participants in brief telephone calls to assess wellbeing and safety.AssessmentsAssessments were administered at baseline and at follow-up visits occurring 1 to 2 months after the second and third experimental sessions and at additional time points in some studies. Blinded independent raters not present during therapy sessions administered the CAPS-IV. Safety data were collected throughout treatment. Here, we present a limited set of assessments to support the rationale of this paper.Primary outcome The CAPS-IV is a semi-structured interview addressing PTSD symptom clusters (re-experiencing, avoidance, negative mood or cognition, and increased arousal) as recognized by DSM-IV (Blake et al. 1995; Nagy et al. 1993; Weathers et al. 2001). The CAPS-IV contains frequency and intensity scores for each of the three symptom clusters that are summed to produce a total severity score, the primary outcome for these studies. The CAPS-IV has a dichotomous diagnostic score assigned on the basis of meeting PTSD diagnostic criteria.Secondary outcome The Beck Depression Inventory—II (BDI-II), an established 21-item measure of self-reported depression symptoms (Beck et al. 1996), was administered in four of the six studies (MP-4, MP-8, MP-9, and MP-12). Responses are made on a four-point Likert scale and summed to produce an overall score.Safety outcomes Safety was assessed by tracking the rates of spontaneously reported reactions (subset of adverse events (AEs) that could be expected based on findings from published studies in healthy volunteers) during experimental sessions and 7 days following, and by recording treatment-emergent AEs (TEAEs), which were not collected on the spontaneously reported reactions list, or were reactions that continued for 7 days or more after experimental sessions. Blood pressure and heart rate were measured in intervals of 15 to 30 min, and body temperature every 60 to 90 min during experimental sessions. Suicidal ideation and behavior were collected at all visits and twice during the 7 days of contact in four of the six studies (MP-4, MP-8, MP-9, and MP-12) using the clinician-administered Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) (Posner et al. 2007, 2011), a structured interview addressing presence and intensity of suicidal ideation and behavior. Participants completed the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task (PASAT) (Gronwall 1977) and Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS) (Randolph 1998) at baseline and 2-month follow-up to determine whether changes in cognitive function had occurred after two sessions with placebo dose or active dose MDMA in specific studies (MP-1, MP-4, and MP-12).Statistical analysisData were pooled across the six studies. Participants who received MDMA (75, 100, 125 mg) were combined into an active dose group; participants who received MDMA (0, 25, 30, 40 mg) were combined for the control group. The modified intent-to-treat set included randomized participants who completed at least one blinded experimental session and a post-baseline assessment. Missing data were not imputed. The safety set included all participants exposed to at least one dose of study drug or placebo.Group differences in baseline characteristics and demographics were evaluated with χ2 tests or independent-samples t tests. The primary efficacy evaluation was made with a mixed-effect repeated measure model (MMRM) on change in CAPS-IV total score from baseline to post second experimental session endpoint, and the post third experimental endpoint. The base model included treatment (active/control), baseline CAPS-IV score, and study as a fixed effect, and participant was specified as a random effect. To assess the relationship between outcome measures and age, PTSD duration, sex, race, and prior self-reported “ecstasy” use (substances assumed to contain MDMA), these variables were added to the base model one at a time. BDI-II scores were analyzed the same way. AEs were categorized with the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) in System Organ Classes and preferred terms. AEs, reactions, and suicidal ideation and behavior were summarized descriptively. Independent-samples t tests compared peak vital signs during experimental sessions between groups. Between-group effect size was calculated with Cohen’s d (Kadel and Kip 2012). SAS software version 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) was used for analyses.
Results|SampleeFigure 1 illustrates flow of participants for these studies. From the 488 telephone-screened, 105 were enrolled and randomized [mean (SD) age, 40.5 (10.5); the majority were white/Caucasian participants (87.6%); and nearly sex balanced (females 58.1%)]. Table ​Table11 displays the characteristics of the sample. Demographic characteristics were approximately matched between treatment arms, and no significant differences were found between groups for demographic and baseline characteristics presented in Table ​Table1.1. The mean (SD) duration of PTSD was 215.3 (190.3) months, with trauma from various causes. Many participants had a lifetime history of positive suicidal ideation (86.8%) and/or behavior (30.9%). The optional supplemental dose was taken in 179/197 (90.9%) of blinded experimental sessions. The dropout rate was 7.6% (8/105), with six participants terminating early, but having completed at least one experimental session and follow-up assessment.Table 1Demographics and baseline characteristicsaControl(n = 31)Active(n = 74)Total(n = 105)Age, mean (SD), years40.4 (8.5)40.5 (11.4)40.5 (10.6)Sex, n (%) Male12 (38.7)32 (43.2)44 (41.9) Female19 (61.3)42 (56.8)61 (58.1)Race, n (%) White/Caucasian27 (87.1)65 (87.8)92 (87.6) Latino/Hispanic1 (3.2)2 (2.7)3 (2.9) Native American1 (3.2)1 (1.4)2 (1.9) Middle Eastern1 (3.2)1 (1.4)2 (1.9) Other/biracial1 (3.2)5 (6.8)6 (5.7)BMI, mean (SD)26.2 (6.1)26.1 (5.4)26.1 (5.6)Duration of PTSD, mean (SD), months197.9 (139.1)222.6 (208.5)215.3 (190.3)Pre-study PTSD medicationsb, n (%)Sertraline10 (32.3)25 (33.8)35 (33.3)Paroxetine4 (12.9)14 (18.9)18 (17.1)Pre-study therapy, n (%)CPT, IPT04 (5.4)4 (3.8)Other CBT24 (77.4)34 (45.9)68 (64.8)EMDR11 (35.5)22 (39.7)33 (31.4)Group therapy4 (12.9)18 (24.3)22 (21.0)PE3 (9.7)5 (6.8)8 (7.6)Psychodynamic9 (29.0)14 (18.9)23 (21.9)Insight6 (19.4)15 (20.3)21 (20.0)Other18 (58.1)49 (66.2)67 (63.8)None02 (2.7)2 (1.9)Prior ecstasy use, n (%) Yes7 (22.6)24 (32.4)31 (29.5) No24 (77.4)50 (67.6)74 (70.5)Lifetime C-SSRSc, n (%) Positive ideation14 (77.8)45 (90.0)59 (86.8) Serious ideation4 (22.2)21 (42.0)25 (36.8) Positive behavior6 (33.3)15 (30.0)21 (30.9)CAPS-IV total score Baseline, mean (SD)81.3 (15.9)85.8 (19.3)84.5 (18.4)BDI-II total scored Baseline, mean (SD)26.1 (10.6)30.2 (11.6)29.1 (11.4)Open in a separate windowBMI, body mass index; CPT, cognitive processing therapy; IPT, interpersonal therapy; CBT, cognitive-behavioral therapy; EMDR, eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy; PE, prolonged exposure therapy; C-SSRS, Columbia–Suicide Severity Rating Scale; CAPS-IV, Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale; BDI-II, Beck Depression InventoryaThere were no significant group differences (χ2 or independent t tests) for any variables presented in this tablebSertraline and paroxetine are the only two FDA-approved medications for PTSD. Participants took many other medications for symptom management pre-study that are not presented here. Twelve participants took both sertraline and paroxetinecLifetime accounts for all suicidal ideation and behavior prior to study, according to participant recall and medical records. According to the C-SSRS scoring guide, scores of four or five on the suicidal ideation category are considered serious ideation, and scores of one or greater are considered positive behavior or ideation. Four phase 2 studies administered the C-SSRS (control group n = 18 and active MDMA group n = 50)dFor BDI-II, active group (n = 50) and control group (n = 18)Primary outcomeThe change in CAPS-IV total score (Fig. ​(Fig.1)1) from Baseline to after the second experimental session was significantly different [t(95) = − 4.25, P < 0.0001] between control (0–40 mg) and active (75–125 mg) groups (Table ​(Table2).2). The active group had the greatest estimated mean (SE) drop in scores − 30.4 (3.20) compared to the control group − 10.5 (4.46). The between-group Cohen’s d effect size was 0.8, indicating a large treatment effect. Study, age, PTSD duration, sex, race, and prior “ecstasy” use did not predict outcome in this model.Open in a separate windowFigure 1CAPS-IV total score least squared mean estimates at endpoints. The change in scores from baseline to post two experimental sessions were significantly different between MDMA and control groups (***P < 0.0001). After the third MDMA session, the active dose group showed further improvement compared to post two MDMA sessions (***P < 0.0001)Table 2Outcome measuresaControl(n = 31)ActiveMDMA(n = 72)Mean difference (control vs. active)CAPS-IV total scorePost 2 experimental sessions, LS (SE) changeb− 10.47 (4.46)− 32.43 (3.20)–Difference (active − control)––− 21.95 (5.17)P value0.0208< 0.0001< 0.0001Post 3 experimental sessions, LS (SE) changeb–− 45.39 (3.61)c–P value–< 0.0001–Difference post 3 − post 2, LS (SE) change–− 12.97 (2.89)c–P value–< 0.0001–CAPS-IV PTSD diagnostic criteria met, n (%)Post 2 experimental sessions Yes24 (77.4%)33 (45.8%)– No7 (22.6%)39 (54.2%)–Post 3 experimental sessionsc Yes–24 (47.1%) No–27 (52.9%)–BDI-II total scorePost 2 experimental sessions, LS (SE) changeb− 6.46 (2.69)− 12.44 (1.84)–Difference (active − control)––− 5.97 (3.03)P value0.019< 0.00010.0534Post 3 experimental sessions, LS (SE) changeb–− 17.36 (1.89)–P value–< 0.0001–Difference post 3 − post 2, LS (SE) change–− 9.40 (5.66)–P value–0.1019–Open in a separate windowCAPS-IV, Clinician Administered PTSD Scale; BDI-II, Beck Depression Inventory-II; LS, least square mean estimates; SE, standard erroraAll outcomes are based on intent-to-treat setbCompared to baselinecActive MDMA group (n = 51 for CAPS) post 3 experimental sessions, control group crossed over after 2 blinded sessions, except for MP2 study (data not included)Secondary outcomesAccording to CAPS-IV assessment at the endpoint 1–2 months post two experimental sessions (Table ​(Table2),2), more participants in the active group (54.2%) did not meet PTSD diagnostic criteria than the control group (22.6%). Depression symptom improvement on the BDI-II was greatest for the active dose group, estimated mean (SE) change active − 12.4 (1.84) versus control group − 6.5 (2.69), with the difference between groups trending toward significance [t(61) = − 1.97, P = 0.053].Depending on the study, after two blinded experimental sessions, most participants in the active dose group had one additional open-label (MDMA 100–125 mg, n = 42) or blinded session (MDMA 75–125 mg, n = 9). The estimated mean change (SE) from baseline to post third session on CAPS-IV for the active dose group was − 45.4 (3.61) with a significant further decline from second to third session [t(95) = − 12.58, P < 0.0001]. The within-participant pre-test (baseline) to post-test Cohen’s d effect size increased from 1.4 (post two sessions) to 1.9 (post three sessions). Due to the crossover, there is no between-group comparison for the post third session time point.Safety and tolerabilityTreatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) during the blinded treatment segment most commonly reported across all doses included events in the following MedDRA System Organ Classes (SOC): psychiatric disorders, gastrointestinal disorders, and general disorders (eTable 2). The most frequently reported psychiatric TEAEs (Table ​(Table3)3) were anxiety, depressed mood, irritability, and panic attack. On the day of blinded experimental sessions, reactions reported by ≥ 40% of participants in either group were anxiety, dizziness, fatigue, headache, jaw clenching/tight jaw, lack of appetite, and nausea. The majority of expected reactions were rated mild or moderate, and the frequency of reports decreased over the 7 days following an experimental session (eTables 5 and 6). No changes in neurocognitive function were detected (eTable 4).Table 3Treatment-emergent adverse events during the blinded treatment segment and expected reactions during two blinded MDMA sessionsControl(n = 31)ActiveMDMA(n = 72)Total(n = 103)Top reactions during experimental sessions, n (%)a Anxiety15 (48.39)52 (72.22)67 (65.05) Dizziness6 (19.35)29 (40.28)35 (34.00) Fatigue18 (58.06)35 (48.61)53 (51.46) Headache22 (70.97)38 (52.78)60 (58.25) Jaw clenching, tight jaw6 (19.35)46 (63.89)52 (50.49) Lack of appetite7 (22.58)35 (48.61)42 (40.78) Nausea6 (19.35)29 (40.28)35 (33.98)Psychiatric TEAEs, n (%)b Anxiety3 (9.7)17 (23.6)20 (19.4) Depressed mood1 (3.2)6 (8.3)7 (6.8) Irritability03 (5.6)3 (2.9) Panic attack03 (5.6)3 (2.9)Open in a separate windowTEAE, treatment-emergent adverse eventaFrequency of subjects who reported an expected, spontaneously reported reaction collected during blinded experimental sessions 1 and 2 (only reactions reported by ≥ 40% of participants in any group are displayed; see supplemental for full list of reactions)bFrequency of subjects who self-reported psychiatric adverse events after first drug administration until the day before experimental session 3 (only AEs reported by three or more subjects in either group displayed)There were no unexpected MDMA-related SAEs. Four SAEs were reported during the blinded treatment period, including one instance of suicidal ideation (30 mg) (Mithoefer et al. 2018); one SAE of exacerbation of ventricular extrasystoles was reported during an open-label session (125 mg) (Mithoefer et al. 2018) and one SAE of suicidal behavior prior to MDMA exposure in the first experimental session.There was no suicidal behavior during the treatment period after dosing (eTable 3). At baseline, prior to any drug dosing, the active dose group (46%) had much higher rates of positive suicidal ideation than the control group (16.7%), but the lifetime reports (Table ​(Table1)1) were similar between groups. During the treatment phase, suicidal ideation transiently increased in some participants and was more common in the active MDMA group (eTable 3), although the causal relationship to the psychotherapeutic processing of traumatic memories or to MDMA itself, or to random group differences could not be determined.
Discussion|By pooling data across six phase 2 trials, we found significant symptom reductions in a large sample of participants with PTSD treated with active doses of MDMA combined with psychotherapy. The results informed the design of two phase 3 trials (one now ongoing the other to follow) that were approved through a Special Protocol Assessment by the FDA. The reproducible findings attained by various therapy teams in participants with PTSD arising from different types of traumatic experiences demonstrate the generalizability of this manualized drug-therapy approach and the applicability of the MAPS MDMA Therapy Training Program. Overall, the treatment was safe and efficacious for civilians and veterans/first responders with chronic PTSD who had previously failed to respond to pharmacotherapies and/or psychotherapy. More than half of the participants had previously undergone first-line trauma-focused psychotherapies, and all but two participants had received some type of psychotherapy prior to study enrollment. MDMA-assisted psychotherapy was effective for these individuals, suggesting a different mechanism of action for MDMA for reducing PTSD symptoms.The data show that when using the “gold standard” measure of PTSD (CAPS-IV) as a primary outcome measure, with blinded raters, for participants with highly refractory PTSD (mean duration 215.3 months), there was a significant effect after two blinded active doses of MDMA adjunctive with psychotherapy versus psychotherapy with control doses. Notably, more participants in the active dose group (54.2%) no longer met PTSD diagnostic criteria compared to the control group (22.6%). The between-group effect size was large with Cohen’s d equal to 0.8. The effect size was used in power calculations for phase 3 trials. Planned enrollment is 100 participants in each phase 3 trial, with an interim analysis and option for sample size adjustment after 60% of participants have completed the primary endpoint. In addition, depression symptoms trended toward greater improvement in participants receiving active MDMA compared with the control group.After a third experimental session, symptoms on average improved further for the active dose group. The interpretation is limited because the third session was open label for most participants, and there was no control group for comparison due to the open-label crossover after two blinded sessions for most participants. However, it appears that while many people respond adequately after two MDMA sessions, an additional session leads to more participants reaching clinically significant symptom reductions and greater drops in CAPS-IV scores. For this reason, phase 3 trials will include three blinded experimental sessions to maximize response at the primary endpoint (2 months post third experimental session, i.e., 18 weeks post baseline).Phase 2 data showed that 75 mg MDMA produced significant improvement (Mithoefer et al. 2018), yet the sample was quite small (n = 7); therefore, we do not know what the optimal dose is, 75 mg, 100 mg, or 125 mg. There is individual variation in subjective effects of MDMA, and fixed-dose regimens do not account for differences in body weight. To gather more information about optimal dosing, phase 3 trials from 15 sites in the USA, Canada, and Israel will employ a flexible dose regimen. Participants will be randomized to receive equal-weight blinded capsules of inactive placebo or MDMA (80 mg) plus supplemental half-dose unless contraindicated in experimental session one, and then have the choice to escalate the dose to 120 mg with optional supplemental dose (or stay at 80 mg) in the next two sessions. An inactive placebo plus the same psychotherapy will be used as the control group, with the same option to escalate the dose. To minimize bias, a blinded independent rater (IR) pool will administer the primary outcome measure (CAPS-5) to participants across all sites based on availability of IRs. Consecutive assignments to the same IR will not be permitted. Independent raters will remain blinded to the number or timing of CAPS measurements in the study; therefore, we cannot reveal this information until the trials are complete.The safety and tolerability of limited doses of MDMA in highly controlled therapeutic settings in a PTSD population was adequate, consistent with previous phase 1 studies. There was a dose effect for mean increase in vital signs during MDMA sessions (eTable 7), with values returning or trending toward baseline by the end of the 8-h session. Because vital sign increases did not reach clinically concerning ranges, the frequency of required vital measurements will be reduced in phase 3 trials to baseline, pre-supplemental dose, and session end. Vital signs at the pre-supplemental dose reading will be taken into consideration before administering the additional half-dose. Neurocognitive measures will not be employed during phase 3 because phase 2 studies showed no evidence of cognitive impairment after two doses of MDMA (eTable 4).MDMA at all doses tested was well tolerated, as demonstrated by the low rate of TEAEs and expected reactions. Most were mild to moderate, resolving as MDMA effects dissipated or during the week following (eTables 5 and 6). During experimental sessions, the active MDMA group had higher incidences of some reactions, including anxiety, dizziness, jaw clenching/tight jaw, lack of appetite, and nausea. Whether reactions are due to the pharmacological effects of MDMA or from augmented trauma processing catalyzed by MDMA effects cannot be determined from the data collected in these studies, but phase 1 studies in healthy individuals report similar reactions to MDMA. During the 7 days following experimental sessions, some reactions occurred more often in the active dose group for the first few days before declining by the end of the week. For this reason, the number of telephone contacts after an experimental session will be less frequent for phase 3 trials, which will require four telephone contacts over 7 days. In accordance with FDA guidance for all psychiatric drugs under development, the C-SSRS will be given at each in-person visit. In phase 2 trials, there were no related deaths or incidence of suicidal behavior after MDMA. The low dropout rate (7.6%) in MDMA trials compared to other PTSD treatments (approximately 17–36%) (Bradley et al. 2005; Marshall et al. 2001; Steenkamp et al. 2015) could be related to the propensity of MDMA to make trauma processing more tolerable with rapid symptom improvements in the days and weeks following. Participants in the placebo/control group had the opportunity to cross over to receive three open-label (100–125 mg) sessions of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy if they complete the blinded segment which likely motivated participants to complete treatment.MDMA in the context of psychotherapy was found to have a low potential for abuse. There were no AEs or treatment discontinuation related to “ecstasy” seeking or craving, and no reports of use outside the study through the post third session endpoint. Indeed, many participates anecdotally reported that the experimental sessions were not particularly pleasurable experiences, but rather difficult therapeutic work delving into their traumatic memories. Overall, safety outcomes were favorable for use of MDMA in individuals with PTSD in a supportive environment with trained mental health professionals.
Limitations|There are limitations of these trials and the associated pooled data analyses. The sample was nearly gender balanced, but participants and therapists were predominantly White/Caucasian. Phase 3 studies will evaluate the generalizability to individuals from more diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds. Across the six trials, there were variations in study design, such as differences in timing of outcome measures, doses tested, number of blinded experimental sessions, and number of participants in each dose group. Drawbacks of pooled data analyses are that multiple doses tested were combined into two groups—control group and active dose group—and that the third experimental session was blinded or open-label full-dose MDMA, depending on the study. Also, there was no control group for a between-group comparison of the post third session; therefore, response after three sessions was limited to a within-subject analysis. Due to small sample sizes, reliability of effect size estimates from individual studies is unknown. Blinding of treatment assignment for psychoactive substances is a recognized challenge. Both psychological and vital sign changes during experimental sessions can be clues to the group assignment. To reduce bias, blinded independent raters who were not present during therapy sessions administered the CAPS-IV. However, participants and therapists often, but not always, accurately guessed dose assignment (Mithoefer et al. 2011, 2018; Oehen et al. 2013; Ot’alora et al. 2018)—a recognized limitation in clinical trials of all drugs with perceivable effects and in all psychotherapy studies where there is no possibility of effective blinding.
Conclusions|Based on the promising safety and efficacy results from these six phase 2 trials, we have designed multi-site, placebo-controlled phase 3 trials that started in late 2018 to evaluate MDMA-assisted psychotherapy in approximately 200 participants with PTSD. Limitations discussed here will be addressed, and if findings are significant and no new safety concerns arise, MDMA could become an FDA-approved treatment for PTSD in the context of psychotherapy by 2021.
Electronic supplementary material|
ESM 1(125K, docx)(DOCX 111 kb)
ESM 2(663K, pdf)(PDF 663 kb)

Acknowledgments|We sincerely thank the study participants for their willingness to volunteer for these clinical trials, and staff whose hard work made the trials possible: Rebecca Matthews, BA and Ben Shechet, BA for monitoring data; Colin Hennigan, MA for clinical database management and randomization monitoring; Allison Wilens, BS and John Poncini, BS for supporting video data collection; and to acknowledge study therapists: Michael Mithoefer, MD; Anne Mithoefer, BSN; Peter Oehen, MD; Verena Widmer, RN; Ingrid Pacey, MBBS, FRCP[C]; Hayden Rubensohn, MD; Richard Yensen, PhD; Donna Dryer, MD, FRCP[C]; Keren Tzarfaty, Naftali Halberstadt, PhD; Tali Nachshoni, MD; Daniel Dogan, LCSW; Ido Siemion, PhD; Sergio Marchevsky; Marcela Ot’alora G, MA, LPC; Bruce Poulter, RN, MPH; Jim Grigsby, PhD; Will Van Derveer, MD; Sandra Van Derveer, MA; Saj Razvi, LPC, MA; Sara Gael Giron; Alison McQueen, MA, LPC; study coordinators: Sarah Sadler, AA; Katrina Blommaert, MPH; Dafna Bornstein, MA; Peggy Ivers; independent raters: Mark Wagner, PhD; Joy Wymer, PhD; Rafael Traber, MD; Zach Walsh, PhD; Annie-Maria Ullman, PhD; Carla Clements, PhD, LPC; medical monitor Julie Holland MD; and all other site personnel including the physicians, pharmacists, adherence raters, and night attendants.
Author contributions|S.H. is responsible for integrity of the data and accuracy of data analysis.Study concept and design: M.C.M., A.M., L.J., A.E., B.Y.-K., R.D., M.W.Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: all authors.Drafting of the manuscript: A.A.F., L.J., M.C.M., M.W., Z.W.Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: all authors.Obtained funding: R.D.Study supervision: M.C.M., A.M.
Funding/sponsor|These six phase 2 studies were sponsored by the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS), a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization. MAPS provided the MDMA and fully funded this study from private donations. MAPS Public Benefit Corporation (MAPS PBC), wholly owned by MAPS, was the trial organizer.Role of the funder/sponsorMAPS and MAPS PBC assisted with study design; monitoring of study data; analysis, management, and interpretation of data; preparation, review, and approval of manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The funder had no role in the collection of data or conduct of the study.
Compliance with ethical standards|Conflict of interestM.C.M. received salary support from MAPS PBC as a clinical investigator and clinical trial medical monitor as well as for training and supervision of research psychotherapists.A.A.F. received salary support for full-time employment with MAPS PBC.L.J. received salary support for full-time employment with MAPS PBC.A.M. received salary support from MAPS PBC as a clinical investigator and for training and supervision of research psychotherapists.M.W. received research support to conduct study assessments.Z.W. received research support to conduct study assessments.S.H. received salary support from MAPS PBC as a biostatistician.B.Y.-K. received salary support for full-time employment with MAPS.A.E. received salary support for full-time employment with MAPS PBC.R.D. received salary support for full-time employment with MAPS.
Footnotes|Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Abstract|A series of dipyridodiazepinones have been shown to be potent inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT). One compound, BI-RG-587, had a Ki of 200 nanomolar for inhibition of HIV-1 RT that was noncompetitive with respect to deoxyguanosine triphosphate. BI-RG-587 was specific for HIV-1 RT, having no effect on feline and simian RT or any mammalian DNA polymerases. BI-RG-587 inhibited HIV-1 replication in vitro as demonstrated by in situ hybridization, inhibition of protein p24 production, and the lack of syncytia formation in cultured human T cell lines and freshly isolated human peripheral blood lymphocytes. Cytotoxicity studies of BI-RG-587 on human cells showed a high therapeutic index (greater than 8000) in culture.
Abstract|A complementary DNA for the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein (GFP) produces a fluorescent product when expressed in prokaryotic (Escherichia coli) or eukaryotic (Caenorhabditis elegans) cells. Because exogenous substrates and cofactors are not required for this fluorescence, GFP expression can be used to monitor gene expression and protein localization in living organisms.
Abstract|BackgroundCoronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) occurs after exposure to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). For persons who are exposed, the standard of care is observation and quarantine. Whether hydroxychloroquine can prevent symptomatic infection after SARS-CoV-2 exposure is unknown. MethodsWe conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial across the United States and parts of Canada testing hydroxychloroquine as postexposure prophylaxis. We enrolled adults who had household or occupational exposure to someone with confirmed Covid-19 at a distance of less than 6 ft for more than 10 minutes while wearing neither a face mask nor an eye shield (high-risk exposure) or while wearing a face mask but no eye shield (moderate-risk exposure). Within 4 days after exposure, we randomly assigned participants to receive either placebo or hydroxychloroquine (800 mg once, followed by 600 mg in 6 to 8 hours, then 600 mg daily for 4 additional days). The primary outcome was the incidence of either laboratory-confirmed Covid-19 or illness compatible with Covid-19 within 14 days. ResultsWe enrolled 821 asymptomatic participants. Overall, 87.6% of the participants (719 of 821) reported a high-risk exposure to a confirmed Covid-19 contact. The incidence of new illness compatible with Covid-19 did not differ significantly between participants receiving hydroxychloroquine (49 of 414 [11.8%]) and those receiving placebo (58 of 407 [14.3%]); the absolute difference was −2.4 percentage points (95% confidence interval, −7.0 to 2.2; P=0.35). Side effects were more common with hydroxychloroquine than with placebo (40.1% vs. 16.8%), but no serious adverse reactions were reported. ConclusionsAfter high-risk or moderate-risk exposure to Covid-19, hydroxychloroquine did not prevent illness compatible with Covid-19 or confirmed infection when used as postexposure prophylaxis within 4 days after exposure. (Funded by David Baszucki and Jan Ellison Baszucki and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04308668.)
IntroductionSevere|acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the global, rapidly emerging virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19).1 The current public health strategies to mitigate transmission are rapid identification of cases, isolation, contact tracing, and self-quarantine of those exposed. Once a person is exposed, observation and quarantine during a 14-day incubation period is the standard of care. To date, no medication has been shown to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission.Both chloroquine and the derivative molecule hydroxychloroquine have in vitro activity against SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2.2,3 Hydroxychloroquine is thought to impair the terminal glycosylation of the angiotensin-converting–enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, which is the binding site for the envelope spike glycoprotein and has been shown to inhibit endolysosome function.2,4 In addition, hydroxychloroquine may have greater in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2 than chloroquine.3The majority of clinical studies of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine for Covid-19 have focused on hospitalized patients.5-8 Yet, to alter the trajectory of the epidemic, it is necessary to break the chain of transmission. The risk of secondary household transmission has been estimated as 10 to 15%.9,10 Small, nonrandomized, noncontrolled cohort studies have suggested that the use of hydroxychloroquine might reduce or even eliminate this risk.11 Whether short-term high-dose hydroxychloroquine can prevent disease soon after a high-risk exposure remains unknown. We hypothesized that hydroxychloroquine could potentially be used as postexposure prophylaxis, to prevent symptomatic infection after exposure to Covid-19.
Methods|Trial Design and Oversight We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to evaluate postexposure prophylaxis with hydroxychloroquine after exposure to Covid-19.12 We randomly assigned participants in a 1:1 ratio to receive either hydroxychloroquine or placebo. Participants had known exposure (by participant report) to a person with laboratory-confirmed Covid-19, whether as a household contact, a health care worker, or a person with other occupational exposures. Trial enrollment began on March 17, 2020, with an eligibility threshold to enroll within 3 days after exposure; the objective was to intervene before the median incubation period of 5 to 6 days. Because of limited access to prompt testing, health care workers could initially be enrolled on the basis of presumptive high-risk exposure to patients with pending tests; however, on March 23, eligibility was changed to exposure to a person with a positive polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) assay for SARS-CoV-2, with the eligibility window extended to within 4 days after exposure. This trial was approved by the institutional review board at the University of Minnesota and conducted under a Food and Drug Administration Investigational New Drug application. In Canada, the trial was approved by Health Canada; ethics approvals were obtained from the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, the University of Manitoba, and the University of Alberta. Participants We included participants who had household or occupational exposure to a person with confirmed Covid-19 at a distance of less than 6 ft for more than 10 minutes while wearing neither a face mask nor an eye shield (high-risk exposure) or while wearing a face mask but no eye shield (moderate-risk exposure). Participants were excluded if they were younger than 18 years of age, were hospitalized, or met other exclusion criteria (see the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). Persons with symptoms of Covid-19 or with PCR-proven SARS-CoV-2 infection were excluded from this prevention trial but were separately enrolled in a companion clinical trial to treat early infection. Setting Recruitment was performed primarily with the use of social media outreach as well as traditional media platforms. Participants were enrolled nationwide in the United States and in the Canadian provinces of Quebec, Manitoba, and Alberta. Participants enrolled themselves through a secure Internet-based survey using the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) system.13 After participants read the consent form, their comprehension of its contents was assessed; participants provided a digitally captured signature to indicate informed consent. We sent follow-up e-mail surveys on days 1, 5, 10, and 14. A survey at 4 to 6 weeks asked about any follow-up testing, illness, or hospitalizations. Participants who did not respond to follow-up surveys received text messages, e-mails, telephone calls, or a combination of these to ascertain their outcomes. When these methods were unsuccessful, the emergency contact provided by the enrollee was contacted to determine the participant’s illness and vital status. When all communication methods were exhausted, Internet searches for obituaries were performed to ascertain vital status. Interventions Randomization occurred at research pharmacies in Minneapolis and Montreal. The trial statisticians generated a permuted-block randomization sequence using variably sized blocks of 2, 4, or 8, with stratification according to country. A research pharmacist sequentially assigned participants. The assignments were concealed from investigators and participants; only pharmacies had access to the randomization sequence. Hydroxychloroquine sulfate or placebo was dispensed and shipped overnight to participants by commercial courier. The dosing regimen for hydroxychloroquine was 800 mg (4 tablets) once, then 600 mg (3 tablets) 6 to 8 hours later, then 600 mg (3 tablets) daily for 4 more days for a total course of 5 days (19 tablets total). If participants had gastrointestinal upset, they were advised to divide the daily dose into two or three doses. We chose this hydroxychloroquine dosing regimen on the basis of pharmacokinetic simulations to achieve plasma concentrations above the SARS-CoV-2 in vitro half maximal effective concentration for 14 days.14 Placebo folate tablets, which were similar in appearance to the hydroxychloroquine tablets, were prescribed as an identical regimen for the control group. Rising Pharmaceuticals provided a donation of hydroxychloroquine, and some hydroxychloroquine was purchased. Outcomes The primary outcome was prespecified as symptomatic illness confirmed by a positive molecular assay or, if testing was unavailable, Covid-19–related symptoms. We assumed that health care workers would have access to Covid-19 testing if symptomatic; however, access to testing was limited throughout the trial period. Covid-19–related symptoms were based on U.S. Council for State and Territorial Epidemiologists criteria for confirmed cases (positivity for SARS-Cov-2 on PCR assay), probable cases (the presence of cough, shortness of breath, or difficulty breathing, or the presence of two or more symptoms of fever, chills, rigors, myalgia, headache, sore throat, and new olfactory and taste disorders), and possible cases (the presence of one or more compatible symptoms, which could include diarrhea).15 All the participants had epidemiologic linkage,15 per trial eligibility criteria. Four infectious disease physicians who were unaware of the trial-group assignments reviewed symptomatic participants to generate a consensus with respect to whether their condition met the case definition.15 Secondary outcomes included the incidence of hospitalization for Covid-19 or death, the incidence of PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, the incidence of Covid-19 symptoms, the incidence of discontinuation of the trial intervention owing to any cause, and the severity of symptoms (if any) at days 5 and 14 according to a visual analogue scale (scores ranged from 0 [no symptoms] to 10 [severe symptoms]). Data on adverse events were also collected with directed questioning for common side effects along with open-ended free text. Outcome data were measured within 14 days after trial enrollment. Outcome data including PCR testing results, possible Covid-19–related symptoms, adherence to the trial intervention, side effects, and hospitalizations were all collected through participant report. Details of trial conduct are provided in the protocol and statistical analysis plan, available at NEJM.org. Sample Size We anticipated that illness compatible with Covid-19 would develop in 10% of close contacts exposed to Covid-19.9 Using Fisher’s exact method with a 50% relative effect size to reduce new symptomatic infections, a two-sided alpha of 0.05, and 90% power, we estimated that 621 persons would need to be enrolled in each group. With a pragmatic, Internet-based, self-referral recruitment strategy, we planned for a 20% incidence of attrition by increasing the sample size to 750 participants per group. We specified a priori that participants who were already symptomatic on day 1 before receiving hydroxychloroquine or placebo would be excluded from the prophylaxis trial and would instead be separately enrolled in the companion symptomatic treatment trial. Because the estimates for both incident symptomatic Covid-19 after an exposure and loss to follow-up were relatively unknown in early March 2020,9 the protocol prespecified a sample-size reestimation at the second interim analysis. This reestimation, which used the incidence of new infections in the placebo group and the observed percentage of participants lost to follow-up, was aimed at maintaining the ability to detect an effect size of a 50% relative reduction in new symptomatic infections. Interim Analyses An independent data and safety monitoring board externally reviewed the data after 25% and 50% of the participants had completed 14 days of follow-up. Stopping guidelines were provided to the data and safety monitoring board with the use of a Lan–DeMets spending function analogue of the O’Brien–Fleming boundaries for the primary outcome. A conditional power analysis was performed at the second and third interim analysis with the option of early stopping for futility. At the second interim analysis on April 22, 2020, the sample size was reduced to 956 participants who could be evaluated with 90% power on the basis of the higher-than-expected event rate of infections in the control group. At the third interim analysis on May 6, the trial was halted on the basis of a conditional power of less than 1%, since it was deemed futile to continue. Statistical Analysis We assessed the incidence of Covid-19 disease by day 14 with Fisher’s exact test. Secondary outcomes with respect to percentage of patients were also compared with Fisher’s exact test. Among participants in whom incident illness compatible with Covid-19 developed, we summarized the symptom severity score at day 14 with the median and interquartile range and assessed the distributions with a Kruskal–Wallis test. We conducted all analyses with SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute), according to the intention-to-treat principle, with two-sided type I error with an alpha of 0.05. For participants with missing outcome data, we conducted a sensitivity analysis with their outcomes excluded or included as an event. Subgroups that were specified a priori included type of contact (household vs. health care), days from exposure to enrollment, age, and sex.
Results|Participants Figure 1. Figure 1. Screening and Randomization. Of the 821 participants who underwent randomization, 96 did not complete the day 14 follow-up survey, of whom 8 formally withdrew from the trial (4 in each group). Investigators confirmed the vital status and lack of infection in 19 participants (10 in the hydroxychloroquine group and 9 in the control group); 17 completed some follow-up surveys without symptoms before being lost to follow-up (13 in the hydroxychloroquine group and 4 in the control group). A total of 52 participants never completed any surveys after enrollment and did not respond to investigators e-mails, text messages, or telephone calls (23 in the hydroxychloroquine group and 29 in the control group). SARS-CoV-2 denotes severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. Table 1. Table 1. Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of the Participants at Baseline. We recruited 821 asymptomatic adult participants who were randomly assigned to the hydroxychloroquine group (414 participants) or the placebo group (407 participants) (Figure 1). The demographic and clinical characteristics of the participants are provided in Table 1. The median age was 40 years (interquartile range, 33 to 50). Women accounted for 51.6% of the trial participants (424 of 821). A total of 27.4% of the participants (225 of 821) reported chronic health conditions, with hypertension being the most common (99 of 821 [12.1%]), followed by asthma (62 of 821 [7.6%]). Health care workers accounted for 66.4% of the participants (545 of 821), the majority being physicians or physician assistants (342 of 545 [62.8%]) and nurses or nursing assistants (128 of 545 [23.5%]). In the case of health care workers, exposure was predominantly from patients (418 of 545 [76.7%]) or ill coworkers (107 of 545 [19.6%]). Among the 29.8% of the participants (245 of 821) who enrolled as a household contact, the majority reported that their Covid-19 contact exposure was either a spouse or partner (114 of 245 [46.5%]) or a parent (43 of 245 [17.6%]). Overall, 87.6% of the participants (719 of 821) had high-risk exposures without eye shields and surgical masks or respirators. Of those, 365 received hydroxychloroquine and 354 received placebo. Approximately 60% of the participants reported not wearing any element of personal protective equipment during their Covid-19 exposure. Primary Outcome Table 2. Table 2. Outcomes of Hydroxychloroquine Therapy for Postexposure Prophylaxis against Covid-19. Figure 2. Figure 2. Cumulative Incidence of Illness Compatible with Coronavirus Disease (Covid-19). The cumulative incidence of illness compatible with Covid-19 was 11.8% in the hydroxychloroquine group (49 of 414 participants) and 14.3% in the placebo group (58 of 407) (P=0.35). The difference equates to a number needed to treat to prevent one infection of 42 persons (lower boundary of the 95% confidence interval for the number needed to treat to prevent one infection, 14 persons; upper boundary of the 95% confidence interval for the number needed to treat to harm 1 person, 50 persons). When we excluded participants who were lost to follow-up, who withdrew, or who were not fully adherent to the trial intervention, the results were similar. When we excluded 13 persons with possible Covid-19 cases who had only one symptom compatible with Covid-19 and no laboratory confirmation, the incidence of new Covid-19 still did not differ significantly between the two groups: 10.4% in the hydroxychloroquine group (43 of 414 participants) and 12.5% in the placebo group (51 of 407) (P=0.38). The vertical bars represent 95% confidence intervals. (Details on symptoms and the adjudication of cases are provided in the Supplementary Appendix.) Overall, new Covid-19 (either PCR-confirmed or symptomatically compatible) developed in 107 of 821 participants (13.0%) during the 14 days of follow-up (Table 2). The incidence of new illness compatible with Covid-19 did not differ significantly between those receiving hydroxychloroquine (49 of 414 [11.8%]) and those receiving placebo (58 of 407 [14.3%]) (P=0.35). The absolute difference was −2.4 percentage points (95% confidence interval, −7.0 to 2.2). Figure 2 shows the development of Covid-19 over time. Two hospitalizations were reported (one in each group). No arrhythmias or deaths occurred. There was no meaningful difference in effectiveness according to the time of starting postexposure prophylaxis or in any of the prespecified subgroups (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix). Overall, 10.7% of the participants (46 in the hydroxychloroquine group and 42 in the placebo group) did not complete the day 14 survey; among these participants, vital status was unknown for 36 in the hydroxychloroquine group and 33 in the control group. In sensitivity analyses, exclusion of these persons from the denominator or inclusion of them as having had an event did not affect the trial conclusions (Table S1). Of 113 persons in whom symptomatic illness developed, 16 had PCR-confirmed disease, 74 had illness that was compatible with probable Covid-19 per the U.S. case definition, 13 had possible Covid-19 with compatible symptoms and epidemiologic linkage, and 10 were adjudicated as not having Covid-19 on the basis of the symptom complex (Table S2). Four additional participants had positive PCR tests and were asymptomatic during the 14-day trial period; symptoms eventually developed in 3 of these participants. The median number of symptoms was 4 (interquartile range, 2 to 5) among participants with Covid-19. The most frequent symptoms were cough (44.9% of the 107 participants with Covid-19), fever (34.6%), shortness of breath (18.7%), fatigue (49.5%), sore throat (40.2%), myalgia (37.4%), and anosmia (23.4%). Among participants who were symptomatic at day 14, the median symptom-severity score (on a scale from 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating greater severity) was 2.8 (interquartile range, 1.6 to 5.0) in those receiving hydroxychloroquine and 2.7 (interquartile range, 1.4 to 4.8) in those receiving placebo (P=0.34). Adherence and Safety Table 3. Table 3. Participant-Reported Adherence and Side Effects. Adherence among the trial participants was moderate. Full adherence to the trial intervention differed according to trial group, with 75.4% of participants in the hydroxychloroquine group (312 of 414) and 82.6% of those in the placebo group (336 of 407) having taken all 19 prescribed tablets over a period of 5 days (P=0.01). The most common reason that participants stopped taking the assigned hydroxychloroquine or placebo was side effects (17 participants in the hydroxychloroquine group and 8 in the placebo group). Side effects were more frequent with hydroxychloroquine than with placebo (Table 3). Among the participants who took any hydroxychloroquine, 40.1% (140 of 349) reported a side effect by day 5, as compared with 16.8% (59 of 351) receiving placebo (P<0.001). Nausea, loose stools, and abdominal discomfort were the most common side effects. There were no serious intervention-related adverse reactions or cardiac arrhythmias. On day 14, we assessed how well the masking of the trial interventions was maintained. Of the 344 participants in the hydroxychloroquine group who completed the day 14 survey question, 160 (46.5%) correctly identified that they received hydroxychloroquine, 151 (43.9%) were unsure, and 33 (10%) believed that they received placebo. Of the 353 participants in the control group who completed the day 14 survey question, 126 (35.7%) correctly identified that they received placebo, 168 (47.6%) were unsure, and 59 (16.7%) believed that they received hydroxychloroquine. Participants who reported any side effect (regardless of trial group) at day 5 were 3.7 times as likely to believe that they received hydroxychloroquine as participants who did not report side effects (122 of 179 participants [68.2%] reporting side effects and 94 of 504 participants [18.7%] not reporting side effects; P<0.001). In the absence of side effects, blinding was well maintained.
Discussion|In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, we investigated the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine as Covid-19 postexposure prophylaxis. In this trial, high doses of hydroxychloroquine did not prevent illness compatible with Covid-19 when initiated within 4 days after a high-risk or moderate-risk exposure. We used a pragmatic approach to recruitment and follow-up of participants through Internet-based self-referral and online follow-up surveys, and we couriered the trial interventions directly to participants’ homes. This approach allowed for recruitment across North America, minimized the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection to researchers, lowered the burden of research participation, and provided a timely answer to this question of whether postexposure prophylaxis was effective. Moreover, this approach allowed broad geographic participation regardless of anyone’s physical distance from academic centers, increasing the generalizability of the findings. One result of our approach was that enrolled participants were generally younger and healthier than those at risk for severe Covid-19. Although the risk of severe Covid-19 is related to age and coexisting conditions,16 the risk of acquiring symptomatic infection is generally still present among adults, regardless of age. Although PCR or serologic testing for asymptomatic infection would have added to the scientific strength of this trial, this was not possible, and we cannot assess an effect on mild or asymptomatic infections. Although a marginal possible benefit from prophylaxis in a more at-risk group cannot be ruled out, the potential risks that are associated with hydroxychloroquine may also be increased in more at-risk populations, and this may essentially negate any benefits that were not shown in this large trial involving younger, healthier participants. We acknowledge that this trial has limitations. Because of the lack of availability of diagnostic testing in the United States, the vast majority of the participants, including health care workers, were unable to access testing. Thus, an a priori symptomatic case definition was used — the U.S. clinical case definition of probable Covid-19.15 This trial represents real-world implementation after exposure. In the context of a randomized trial design, any non–SARS-CoV-2 viral infection (e.g., influenza, adenovirus, or rhinovirus) should be equally distributed in the trial groups. Owing to the Internet-based approach used to rapidly recruit participants in the context of a pandemic, data were obtained by means of participant report. The types and frequency of symptoms that were observed are similar to those in previous studies involving U.S. health care providers.17 The U.S. case definition is how probable Covid-19 cases are nationally reportable.15,18 However, the predictive power of this case definition is unknown, particularly in the younger populations that we studied; given the small number of PCR tests, it remains theoretically possible that hydroxychloroquine therapy limits proven infection. Reproduction of our results in other, ongoing trials would confirm our findings. This randomized trial did not demonstrate a significant benefit of hydroxychloroquine as postexposure prophylaxis for Covid-19. Whether preexposure prophylaxis would be effective in high-risk populations is a separate question, with trials ongoing. In order to end the pandemic, a reduction in community transmission is needed.
Abstract|College students encounter unique challenges leading to poor mental health in the wake of the COVID-19 outbreak. Before the pandemic started, one in five college students experienced one or more diagnosable mental disorders worldwide. The fact that the COVID-19 pandemic affects collegiate mental health underscores the urgent need to understand these challenges and concerns in order to inform the development of courses of action and public health messaging that can better support college students in this crisis. This article provides recommendations that prepare higher education institutions and health professionals for addressing collegiate mental health needs and challenges posed by COVID-19.Keywords: COVID-19, Collegiate mental health, Higher education
1. The impact of COVID-19 on collegiate mental health|Many universities decided to suspend in-person classes and evacuate students in responding to the intensifying concerns surrounding COVID-19. This action can lead to negative psychological consequences among college students. For example, college students often experience compounded negative emotions during the school “closure” (Van Bortel et al., 2016). Some students who find the campus homelike and welcoming harbor intense feelings such as frustration, anxiety, and betrayal. Some may struggle with loneliness and isolation while sheltering in place because of disconnections from friends and partners. For those who receive counseling services on campus, they can no longer access counseling services, which exacerbates their psychological symptoms and increase some students’ risk for suicide and substance abuse.College students experience distress contributed by the uncertainty and abrupt disruption of the semester in addition to the anxiety caused by school closure. As more universities transitioning to remote learning after the spring break, some students suffer from poor mental health due to the disruption of academic routine (Agnew et al., 2019). Many students have to cease their research projects and internships when universities evacuated them from campus. Moreover, disruptions of their research projects and internships jeopardize their program of study, delay their graduation, and undermine their competitiveness on the job market, which in turn fuels anxiety among college students. They may also struggle with the cost of returning home and managing belongings.Many college students have lost their on-campus jobs due to the evacuation, and the pending issue of room and board fees can aggravate their financial hardship and mental health outcomes. They also have concerns and fears of infection and transmission of COVID-19 to their family members when they return home. Given that youth can be asymptomatic carriers (Pan et al., 2020), students may be worried about putting their elder family members at increased risk for infection with severe complications from COVID-19. The fact that the COVID-19 pandemic affects collegiate mental health only underscores the urgent need to understand these challenges and concerns in order to inform the development of courses of action and public health messaging that will support college students during this difficult time.
2. Courses of action|Universities serve an essential role in supporting college students and accommodating their health, education, and safety needs. During the pandemic, the courses of action implemented by universities significantly affect students’ mental health and wellbeing. It is commendable that many universities have responded promptly to the unprecedented situation. They flipped the switch and focused on remote education instead of in-person classes. Although this transition can lead to acute stress among some students due to the lack of time for adjustment, remote learning allows college students to sustain their academic routine which is found to benefit mental health and psychological resilience in the long run (Drake and Whitley, 2014). In addition, college students may experience less anxiety because remote learning helps them continue to manage their academic routine on a regular basis (Wang et al., 2020).Many universities decided to evacuate students in responding to the pandemic. Given the population density in university residence halls, some universities have delayed plans to allow students to visit campuses and retrieve their belongings, which helps ease students’ anxiety associated with the fears and concerns of contracting COVID-19. This decision can also relieve students’ financial hardship by reducing the cost of travel. Further, some universities are considering refunding money from room and board (i.e., residence hall contracts, dining hall meal plans) on a prorated basis, which may support students financially and mitigate distress.
3. Recommendations|Notwithstanding that some universities have responded to the public health emergency, universities should continue to develop courses of action and public health messaging to better address collegiate mental health issues caused by the disruptions of education and career trajectory. First, in addition to remote education, student advising should continue and transition to telecommunication (e.g., phone call, online meeting) in order to provide academic support for students. Faculty and staff should consider offering virtual office hours to students, and they need to work together to maintain the connection and help students process and address academic concerns caused by the disruption of the semester. Second, for students whose internships or research projects were affected by the pandemic, internship site supervisors and research advisors should actively engage in helping students seek alternative plans, enabling them to work from home to maximize internship and research experiences. Third, universities should work on innovative methods to support students to move research projects and capstones forward so that students can fulfil graduation requirements; meanwhile, university career centers should switch to virtue services, continuing to facilitate career development for college students.Of importance is that university counseling centers should set up options to continue to provide college students with counseling services at a distance (i.e., telemental health counseling) within the constraints of the pandemic outbreak. Telemental health has been found effective in treating anxiety and depressive symptoms (Brenes et al., 2015), and implementing telemental health will facilitate the delivery of counseling services to address students’ pressing mental health concerns (Dorsey and Topol, 2020). University counseling centers can also provide options for students to join online support groups that enable them to share common concerns and receive social support (Rollman et al., 2018). Further, university counseling centers and other departments should rally to develop and pass public health messaging onto students, sharing coping resources, and encouraging them to take action to protect their mental health.
4. Conclusion|COVID-19 and its accompanying effects will continue impacting collegiate mental health and wellbeing profoundly; meanwhile, mental health serves a crucial role in combating the epidemic. It is thus imperative for universities to build awareness of students’ mental health needs and concerns, and to empower their students to seek help and support during this biological disaster. College students should tailor coping strategies to meet their specific needs and promote their psychological resilience. Considerable efforts made by universities should be dedicated to helping students thrive in this crisis. With the experience attained supporting students in this pandemic, universities will be well positioned to help college students stay well in mind, body, and spirit during other challenging times.
Role of the funding source|There is no funding source.The corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.
CRediT authorship contribution statement|
Yusen Zhai: Conceptualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Xue Du: Writing - review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest|We declare no competing interests.
 Basic Concepts of Herd Immunity|The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and its associated disease, COVID-19, has demonstrated the devastating impact of a novel, infectious pathogen on a susceptible population. Here, we explain the basic concepts of herd immunity and discuss its implications in the context of COVID-19.
 Establishing Herd Immunity within Populations|The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and its associated disease, COVID-19, has demonstrated the devastating impact of a novel, infectious pathogen on a susceptible population. Here, we explain the basic concepts of herd immunity and discuss its implications in the context of COVID-19.
 Herd Immunity and SARS-CoV-2|Acquired immunity is established at the level of the individual, either through natural infection with a pathogen or through immunization with a vaccine. Herd immunity (Box 1) stems from the effects of individual immunity scaled to the level of the population. It refers to the indirect protection from infection conferred to susceptible individuals when a sufficiently large proportion of immune individuals exist in a population. This population-level effect is often considered in the context of vaccination programs, which aim to establish herd immunity so that those who cannot be vaccinated, including the very young and immunocompromised, are still protected against disease. Depending on the prevalence of existing immunity to a pathogen in a population, the introduction of an infected individual will lead to different outcomes (Figure 1). In a completely naive population, a pathogen will propagate through susceptible hosts in an unchecked manner following effective exposure of susceptible hosts to infected individuals. However, if a fraction of the population has immunity to that same pathogen, the likelihood of an effective contact between infected and susceptible hosts is reduced, since many hosts are immune and, therefore, cannot transmit the pathogen. If the fraction of susceptible individuals in a population is too few, then the pathogen cannot successfully spread, and its prevalence will decline. The point at which the proportion of susceptible individuals falls below the threshold needed for transmission is known as the herd immunity threshold (Anderson and May, 1985Anderson R.M. May R.M. Vaccination and herd immunity to infectious diseases.Nature. 1985; 318: 323-329Crossref
PubMed
Scopus (341)
Google Scholar). Above this level of immunity, herd immunity begins to take effect, and susceptible individuals benefit from indirect protection from infection (Figure 1B).Box 1GlossaryHerd immunity: the indirect protection from infection conferred to susceptible individuals when a sufficiently large proportion of immune individuals exist in a populationHerd immunity threshold: the point at which the proportion of susceptible individuals in a population falls below the threshold needed for transmissionR0: the average number of secondary infections caused by a single infectious individual introduced into a completely susceptible populationRe: the average number of secondary infections generated by a single infectious individual over an infectious period in a partially immune populationOnward transmission: the effective transmission of a pathogen from an infected individual to susceptible host(s)Case Fatality Rate (CFR): proportion of deaths attributed to a certain disease among all individuals diagnosed with that diseaseInfection Fatality Rate (CFR): proportion of deaths attributed to a certain disease among all infected individualsFigure 1Herd ImmunityShow full caption(A) SIR (susceptible, infectious, recovered) model for a completely immunizing infection with an R0 = 4. The model assumes a closed population in which no people leave and no new cases are introduced. Following the introduction of a single infected individual, the proportion of infected individuals (red line) increases rapidly until reaching its peak, which corresponds to the herd immunity threshold. After this point, newly infected individuals infect fewer than one susceptible individual, as a sufficient proportion of the population has become resistant, preventing further spread of the pathogen (orange line).(B) Schematic depiction of the disease propagation dynamics when one infected individual is introduced into a completely susceptible population (top panel) versus a situation in which an infected individual is introduced into a population that has reached the herd immunity threshold (bottom panel). In the naive population, an outbreak quickly emerges, whereas under the scenario of herd immunity, the virus fails to spread and persist in the population.View Large
                                            Image
                                        Figure ViewerDownload Hi-res
                                            image
                                        Download (PPT)
 Consequences of Reaching the SARS-CoV-2 Herd Immunity Threshold in the Absence of a Vaccine|Herd immunity: the indirect protection from infection conferred to susceptible individuals when a sufficiently large proportion of immune individuals exist in a population
 Epidemiological Considerations for SARS-CoV-2 Herd Immunity|Herd immunity threshold: the point at which the proportion of susceptible individuals in a population falls below the threshold needed for transmission
 Immunological Considerations for SARS-CoV-2 Herd Immunity|R0: the average number of secondary infections caused by a single infectious individual introduced into a completely susceptible population
 Recap|Re: the average number of secondary infections generated by a single infectious individual over an infectious period in a partially immune population
Abstract|Many filamentous cyanobacteria grow as multicellular organisms that show a developmental pattern of single nitrogen-fixing heterocysts separated by approximately 10 vegetative cells. Overexpression of a 54-base-pair gene, patS, blocked heterocyst differentiation in Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. A patS null mutant showed an increased frequency of heterocysts and an abnormal pattern. Expression of a patS-gfp reporter was localized in developing proheterocysts. The addition of a synthetic peptide corresponding to the last five amino acids of PatS inhibited heterocyst development. PatS appears to control heterocyst pattern formation through intercellular signaling mechanisms.
Abstract|Retrotransposition of processed mRNAs is a common source of novel sequence acquired during the evolution of genomes. Although the vast majority of retroposed gene copies, or retrogenes, rapidly accumulate debilitating mutations that disrupt the reading frame, a small percentage become new genes that encode functional proteins. By using a multibreed association analysis in the domestic dog, we demonstrate that expression of a recently acquired retrogene encoding fibroblast growth factor 4 (fgf4) is strongly associated with chondrodysplasia, a short-legged phenotype that defines at least 19 dog breeds including dachshund, corgi, and basset hound. These results illustrate the important role of a single evolutionary event in constraining and directing phenotypic diversity in the domestic dog.
Background|BackgroundAn ongoing outbreak of pneumonia associated with the severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) started in December, 2019, in Wuhan, China. Information about critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection is scarce. We aimed to describe the clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia.MethodsIn this single-centered, retrospective, observational study, we enrolled 52 critically ill adult patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia who were admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of Wuhan Jin Yin-tan hospital (Wuhan, China) between late December, 2019, and Jan 26, 2020. Demographic data, symptoms, laboratory values, comorbidities, treatments, and clinical outcomes were all collected. Data were compared between survivors and non-survivors. The primary outcome was 28-day mortality, as of Feb 9, 2020. Secondary outcomes included incidence of SARS-CoV-2-related acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and the proportion of patients requiring mechanical ventilation.FindingsOf 710 patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia, 52 critically ill adult patients were included. The mean age of the 52 patients was 59·7 (SD 13·3) years, 35 (67%) were men, 21 (40%) had chronic illness, 51 (98%) had fever. 32 (61·5%) patients had died at 28 days, and the median duration from admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) to death was 7 (IQR 3–11) days for non-survivors. Compared with survivors, non-survivors were older (64·6 years [11·2] vs 51·9 years [12·9]), more likely to develop ARDS (26 [81%] patients vs 9 [45%] patients), and more likely to receive mechanical ventilation (30 [94%] patients vs 7 [35%] patients), either invasively or non-invasively. Most patients had organ function damage, including 35 (67%) with ARDS, 15 (29%) with acute kidney injury, 12 (23%) with cardiac injury, 15 (29%) with liver dysfunction, and one (2%) with pneumothorax. 37 (71%) patients required mechanical ventilation. Hospital-acquired infection occurred in seven (13·5%) patients.InterpretationThe mortality of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia is considerable. The survival time of the non-survivors is likely to be within 1–2 weeks after ICU admission. Older patients (>65 years) with comorbidities and ARDS are at increased risk of death. The severity of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia poses great strain on critical care resources in hospitals, especially if they are not adequately staffed or resourced.FundingNone.
Methods|An ongoing outbreak of pneumonia associated with the severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) started in December, 2019, in Wuhan, China. Information about critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection is scarce. We aimed to describe the clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia.
Findings|In this single-centered, retrospective, observational study, we enrolled 52 critically ill adult patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia who were admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of Wuhan Jin Yin-tan hospital (Wuhan, China) between late December, 2019, and Jan 26, 2020. Demographic data, symptoms, laboratory values, comorbidities, treatments, and clinical outcomes were all collected. Data were compared between survivors and non-survivors. The primary outcome was 28-day mortality, as of Feb 9, 2020. Secondary outcomes included incidence of SARS-CoV-2-related acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and the proportion of patients requiring mechanical ventilation.
Interpretation|Of 710 patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia, 52 critically ill adult patients were included. The mean age of the 52 patients was 59·7 (SD 13·3) years, 35 (67%) were men, 21 (40%) had chronic illness, 51 (98%) had fever. 32 (61·5%) patients had died at 28 days, and the median duration from admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) to death was 7 (IQR 3–11) days for non-survivors. Compared with survivors, non-survivors were older (64·6 years [11·2] vs 51·9 years [12·9]), more likely to develop ARDS (26 [81%] patients vs 9 [45%] patients), and more likely to receive mechanical ventilation (30 [94%] patients vs 7 [35%] patients), either invasively or non-invasively. Most patients had organ function damage, including 35 (67%) with ARDS, 15 (29%) with acute kidney injury, 12 (23%) with cardiac injury, 15 (29%) with liver dysfunction, and one (2%) with pneumothorax. 37 (71%) patients required mechanical ventilation. Hospital-acquired infection occurred in seven (13·5%) patients.
Funding|The mortality of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia is considerable. The survival time of the non-survivors is likely to be within 1–2 weeks after ICU admission. Older patients (>65 years) with comorbidities and ARDS are at increased risk of death. The severity of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia poses great strain on critical care resources in hospitals, especially if they are not adequately staffed or resourced.
Challenges in treating COVID-19|Coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which appeared in December 2019, presents a global challenge, particularly in the rapid increase of critically ill patients with pneumonia and absence of definitive treatment. To date, over 81,000 cases have been confirmed, with over 2700 deaths. The mortality appears to be around 2%; early published data indicate 25.9% with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia required ICU admission and 20.1% developed acute respiratory distress syndrome [1].There is presently no vaccine or specific anti-viral drug regime used to treat critically ill patients. The management of patients mainly focuses on the provision of supportive care, e.g., oxygenation, ventilation, and fluid management. Combination treatment of low-dose systematic corticosteroids and anti-virals and atomization inhalation of interferon have been encouraged as part of critical COVID-19 management [2]. Other reported therapeutic agents that are used for the treatment of seriously ill patients have been noted in Table 1.
Table 1Potential treatment options of COVID-19ClassesPotential treatment optionsReferenceAnti-viral> 85% of patients received anti-viral agents, including oseltamivir (75 mg every 12 h orally), ganciclovir (0.25 g every 12 h intravenously), and lopinavir/ritonavir tablets (400/100 mg twice daily). Remdesivir is currently under trials at more than ten medical institutions in Wuhan and has been known to prevent MERS-CoV.[1]Anti-malarialAn old anti-malarial, chloroquine phosphate, has been effective in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia due to its anti-viral and anti-inflammatory activities.[3]Herbal treatmentsThere was widespread use of Traditional Chinese Medicine during the last SARS-COV outbreak and it is currently being used in China. The five most commonly used herbs were Astragali Radix (Huangqi), Glycyrrhizae Radix Et Rhizoma (Gancao), Saposhnikoviae Radix (Fangfeng), Atractylodis Macrocephalae Rhizoma (Baizhu), and Lonicerae Japonicae Flo.[4]Open in a separate window
Convalescent plasma: one of the forgotten immunologically based strategies|Passive immunization has been successfully used to treat infectious diseases. A meta-analysis demonstrated a significant reduction in mortality and viral load in studies using convalescent plasma for the treatment of severe acute viral respiratory infections, including those caused by related coronaviruses (SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV) [5]. Serious adverse events were not reported. Eighty SARS patients were treated with convalescent plasma during the last major outbreak. A significantly better outcome was obtained with earlier transfusion (before day 14), and no immediate adverse events were observed.A feasibility intervention study of convalescent plasma for MERS-CoV infection treatment failed to identify sufficient high-titer plasma from patients with confirmed/suspected MERS, their close family members, or healthcare workers exposed to MERS (n = 12 reactive ELISA/443 serum tested). Two fresh-frozen plasma units (250–350 mL/unit) would be required for each enrolled MERS patient ({"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT02190799","term_id":"NCT02190799"}}NCT02190799). Encouragingly, anti-MERS CoV titers measured by ELISA correlated with microneutralization (MN) assays [6].There are currently over 30,000 recovered COVID-19 patients, who could present a valuable resource of convalescent plasma for health care providers. China National Biotec Group Co has claimed that 10 seriously ill patients receiving this immunoglobulin therapy demonstrated improved oxygenation and reduced inflammation and viral load [7]. High-titer specific antibodies should be able to bind to SARS-CoV-2 and neutralize the viral particles, block access to uninfected cells, and activate potent effector mechanisms (e.g., complement activation and phagocytosis).
Potential risks and ethical considerations|It should be noted that treatment with human immunoglobulin has been associated with significantly increased same-day thrombotic event risk (0.04 to 14.9%) [8]. These data indicate the potential value of evaluating the effectiveness of early intervention therapy with convalescent plasma or SARS-CoV-2-specific hyperimmune globulin in patients with acute respiratory disease in this outbreak. Given the lack of knowledge on the basic biology of SARS-CoV-2, including virus variability and mutation, plasma collected locally may better reflect the circulating virus in the population and could be a valid treatment option.Other issues to be considered include the lack of high-quality studies and the need for adequate selection of donors with high neutralizing antibody titers. It is also important to ensure that the production and the use of convalescent plasma take place according to precise ethical and controlled conditions for a possible role of these products of human origin [9].
Conclusion|In the absence of definitive management protocols, many treatment regimes have been explored in the treatment of COVID-19. Some of these treatments may have been tried out of desperation, and among these, some show initial promise. However, it is too early to see any published results of rigorous clinical trials.Using the serum of recovered patients is a tried and tested approach, and trials are underway to study its effectiveness. This treatment appears to be helpful in the short term until definitive and effective treatments are found.
Acknowledgements|None
Authors’ contributions|AC highlighted the potential use of immune plasma for treatment and drafted the MS. HPG contributed to the discussion and revised and formatted the MS. DK is leading the research on COVID-19 Pandemic Preparedness and contributed to the discussion and revised the draft. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Authors’ informationDavid Koh is a Distinguished Professor of Occupational Health and Medicine, Anne Catherine Cunningham is an Associate Professor of Immunology, and Hui Poh Goh is a lecturer in Pharmacy.
Funding|None
Availability of data and materials|Not applicable
Ethics approval and consent to participate|Not applicable
Competing interests|The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Footnotes|Publisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Abstract|Background:
      
    

    
      Remdesivir, a nucleotide analogue prodrug that inhibits viral RNA polymerases, has shown in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      We provided remdesivir on a compassionate-use basis to patients hospitalized with Covid-19, the illness caused by infection with SARS-CoV-2. Patients were those with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection who had an oxygen saturation of 94% or less while they were breathing ambient air or who were receiving oxygen support. Patients received a 10-day course of remdesivir, consisting of 200 mg administered intravenously on day 1, followed by 100 mg daily for the remaining 9 days of treatment. This report is based on data from patients who received remdesivir during the period from January 25, 2020, through March 7, 2020, and have clinical data for at least 1 subsequent day.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      Of the 61 patients who received at least one dose of remdesivir, data from 8 could not be analyzed (including 7 patients with no post-treatment data and 1 with a dosing error). Of the 53 patients whose data were analyzed, 22 were in the United States, 22 in Europe or Canada, and 9 in Japan. At baseline, 30 patients (57%) were receiving mechanical ventilation and 4 (8%) were receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. During a median follow-up of 18 days, 36 patients (68%) had an improvement in oxygen-support class, including 17 of 30 patients (57%) receiving mechanical ventilation who were extubated. A total of 25 patients (47%) were discharged, and 7 patients (13%) died; mortality was 18% (6 of 34) among patients receiving invasive ventilation and 5% (1 of 19) among those not receiving invasive ventilation.
    

    
  


        Conclusions:
      
    

    
      In this cohort of patients hospitalized for severe Covid-19 who were treated with compassionate-use remdesivir, clinical improvement was observed in 36 of 53 patients (68%). Measurement of efficacy will require ongoing randomized, placebo-controlled trials of remdesivir therapy. (Funded by Gilead Sciences.).
Abstract|The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2; previously provisionally named 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV) disease (COVID-19) in China at the end of 2019 has caused a large global outbreak and is a major public health issue. As of 11 February 2020, data from the World Health Organization (WHO) have shown that more than 43 000 confirmed cases have been identified in 28 countries/regions, with >99% of cases being detected in China. On 30 January 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 as the sixth public health emergency of international concern. SARS-CoV-2 is closely related to two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndrome-like coronaviruses, bat-SL-CoVZC45 and bat-SL-CoVZXC21. It is spread by human-to-human transmission via droplets or direct contact, and infection has been estimated to have mean incubation period of 6.4 days and a basic reproduction number of 2.24-3.58. Among patients with pneumonia caused by SARS-CoV-2 (novel coronavirus pneumonia or Wuhan pneumonia), fever was the most common symptom, followed by cough. Bilateral lung involvement with ground-glass opacity was the most common finding from computed tomography images of the chest. The one case of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in the USA is responding well to remdesivir, which is now undergoing a clinical trial in China. Currently, controlling infection to prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2 is the primary intervention being used. However, public health authorities should keep monitoring the situation closely, as the more we can learn about this novel virus and its associated outbreak, the better we can respond.
Abstract|This article introduces a new and unobtrusive wearable monitoring device based on electrodermal activity (EDA) to be used in health-related computing systems. This paper introduces the description of the wearable device capable of acquiring the EDA of a subject in order to detect his/her calm/distress condition from the acquired physiological signals. The lightweight wearable device is placed in the wrist of the subject to allow continuous physiological measurements. With the aim of validating the correct operation of the wearable EDA device, pictures from the International Affective Picture System are used in a control experiment involving fifty participants. The collected signals are processed, features are extracted and a statistical analysis is performed on the calm/distress condition classification. The results show that the wearable device solely based on EDA signal processing reports around 89% accuracy when distinguishing calm condition from distress condition.Keywords: wearable, electrodermal activity, arousal, valence, distress, calmness
1. Introduction|Early mental stress detection can prevent many health problems related to distress (negative stress). Therefore, there is an urgent need to create new technologies to monitor the physical and mental health of people during their daily life. Fortunately, some efforts are being carried out towards monitoring and regulating people’s arousal state [1,2,3], which is indicative of stress or mental illness [4,5,6,7]. Thus, the lack of human–machine interfaces in interpreting the subjects’ emotional states is being faced with the important aim of understanding and managing personal well-being regarding mental health state.In this regard, a number of physiological features have been widely used in the literature [8,9]. These features use to measure alterations in the central nervous system [10,11,12]. One of these physiological markers corresponds to electrodermal activity (EDA). The utilization of EDA is excellent in assessing the arousal level, as it is able to quantify changes in the sympathetic nervous system. In order to continuously measure the EDA signal from the subjects, wearable sensors are the most appropriate in real mobility situations, given their performance in providing detailed user-specific information. Moreover, wearable sensors are greatly valued due to their light weight and their wireless communication capacities with either a computer or other wearable sensors [13].In this sense, there are several low-cost solutions for wearable long-term EDA monitoring. For instance, the similarity of signals between a prototype of the wearable Moodmetric EDA Ring is compared with a laboratory-grade skin conductance sensor in a psycho-physiological experiment [14]. Recently, a pilot study of EDA measurements conducted during a trade fair has been presented [15].This paper describes and assesses the performance of a new wearable electrodermal activity-based device in classifying distress or calm conditions. Section 2 introduces the hardware description of the wearable. Section 3 introduces an experiment that has been designed in order to assess the validity of the proposed wearable. The experimental design and the description of the study population are presented in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2, respectively. Then, in Section 4, the segmentation and processing of the several signals (Section 4.1), as well as the feature extraction process (see Section 4.2) and the statistical analysis of the classification capabilities (see Section 4.3), are described in extensive. Afterwards, the results are offered in Section 5, and Section 6 includes the most outstanding discussion and conclusions related to this work.
2. Signal Monitoring and Hardware Description|The electrodermal activity (EDA) measures the changes in conductivity produced in the skin due to increases in the activity of sweat glands. The preferred sites for EDA measures are located in the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet. The eccrine glands secrete sweat due to external stimuli and endogenous processes (memory, attention, vigilance, motor commitment, etc.), filling the skin pores and increasing the conductivity [16]. The sudomotor nerve activity (SMNA) is responsible for triggering the sudomotor fibers that activate the sweat glands. SMNA controls different physiological processes, like thermal regulation or sensory discrimination [17,18]. Nevertheless, it has been reported that SMNA is linked to the emotional state, particularly influencing the arousal dimension [19].In the scientific literature two different methodologies are described for measuring EDA signals. On the one hand, the endosomatic methodology (ESM) is characterized by not using external current to acquire the EDA signals. Although this method is non-intrusive, it is difficult to interpret the recorded signals [19]. This is the main reason why the exosomatic methodology (EXM) is commonly used to measure EDA signals. EXM recording is performed by using direct current (DC-EXM), or alternating current (AC-EXM). Notice that most EDA studies have been done with DC-EXM, because the empirical superiority of the AC-EXM variant has not been demonstrated [19]. Consequently, this work has performed a DC-EXM methodology with a constant current source.EDA signals are composed by the superposition of two different components. On the one hand, the phasic component or skin conductance response (SCR) can be observed when the sudomotor nerve is activated. Given this relationship, SCR has been widely used to measure the sympathetic nervous system [8,20,21]. From a morphological point of view, SCR is represented by a peak or a burst of peaks with different amplitudes, slopes and decays depending on the nature of the stimulus [19]. On the other hand, the tonic component, or skin conductance level (SCL), represents the base line of the skin conductance. SCL varies among people, depending on their physiological states and autonomic regulation [22]. Thus, the EDA morphology is represented by a fast changing SCR signal modulated by a slowly varying SCL component. Given the slow response of the SCL component, the useful information ranges from 0 to 0.05 Hz. Similarly, the energy of the SCR component ranges from 0.05 to 1.5 Hz. Indeed, it has been reported that the average activation rate of sudomotor fibers (responsible of the SCR component) are measured at 0.62 Hz [23].In our electronic design, guided by EDA features previously described, the EDA sensor measures DC exosomatic electrodermal activity through a couple of Ag/AgCl disc electrodes with contact diameters of 10 mm. The electrodes are attached to the medial phalanges in palm sides of index and middle fingers (see Figure 1). A small DC current is applied to the stratum corneum under the electrodes. Exceeding current must be limited to 10 μA/cm2 in order to avoid damage in the sweat gland ducts [24] and prevent nonlinearities in the current–voltage curve.Open in a separate windowFigure 1Prototype of the wearable. (Left) The wearable is put in the wrist of the non-dominant hand. (Right) The electrodes are attached to the medial phalanges in the palm sides of index and middle fingers.A single-supply, rail-to-rail input/output, precision operational amplifier, AD860x (Analog Devices) [25], implements a voltage-controlled linear current source (transconductor) as shown in Figure 2b. Such a compact solution is feasible, given that the load (stratum corneum) can be connected in a floating configuration, the input can provide all the required load current, and the current does not exceed the operational amplifier’s output current limit. In addition, a single-supply operation requires the generation of a virtual ground, usually at the halfway along power supply (VDD/2). Bearing this in mind, a resistor divider biasing technique (Rd1 and Rd2) has been used, buffered by a second operational amplifier, AD860x (Analog Devices), to provide a low-impedance ground at first operational amplifier’s non-inverting input, as shown in Figure 2a. Cd1 forms a low-pass filter to eliminate conducted noise on the voltage rail. Cb1 and Cb2 are bypass capacitors and Cb is a bulk capacitor.Open in a separate windowFigure 2Electrodermal activity sensor building blocks. (a) Virtual ground. Rd1 = Rd2 = 100 kΩ, Cd1 = 1 μF, Cb1 = Cb2 = 100 nF, and Cb = 47 μF; (b) Current source. Rref = 825 kΩ; (c) Low-pass filter. Rp = 110 kΩ, Cp = 1 μF, Ra1 = 75 kΩ, Ra2 = 150 kΩ, Ca1 = Ca2 = 1 μF, Rg1 = Rg2 = 10 kΩ, and Cf = 1 nF.Therefore, the current fed into the skin is calculated as:Iskin=12VDDRref(1)In this regard, the Rref = 825 kΩ reference resistor limits the current injected by the electrodes into the skin to a value around 2.546 μA/cm2, well below the 10 μA/cm2 recommendation.Similarly, the skin resistance is calculated on the basis of the reference resistor as:Rskin=(1−2VoutVDD)Rref(2)By taking the inverse of Equation (2), the skin conductance is obtained.Finally, Figure 2c shows a third-order, low-pass filter with a cutoff frequency of about 1.5 Hz. The filter is implemented as a second-order low-pass active filter stage followed by a first-order passive RC (Rp and Cp) low-pass filter stage. The active stage consists of a single-supply, low-pass Sallen-Key topology (Ra1, Ra2, Ca1 and Ca2) with a Butterworth response characteristic. The advantage of this second-order low-pass topology is that it only uses one operational amplifier, again AD860x (Analog Devices). Furthermore, this allows the addition of 2× gain (Rg1 and Rg2) to the signal chain. This filter limits the EDA signal bandwidth and accommodates its amplitude to the input dynamic range of the micro-controller’s analog-digital converter (ADC). Cf helps to the operational amplifier’s stability.The sensor power rail is derived from a filtered 3.3 V system supply. Generous power supply bypassing and ground planes on the printed circuit board help to reduce noise.
3. Experimental Protocol|3.1. Experimental DesignPictures from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) have been chosen in order to trigger the desired arousal and valence levels [26], for the sake of eliciting distress and calmness. In fact, IAPS consists of a standard and categorized database of color photographs created to provide a wide range of affective stimuli. Moreover, the two primary dimensions recorded in the database are affective valence (ranging from pleasant to unpleasant) and arousal (ranging from calm to excited). So, for each IAPS picture the mean and standard deviation of arousal and valence is provided in four different tables constructed from the responses of men, women and children who responded by means of the Self-Assessment Manikin, an affective rating system [27], to the emotion felt when exposed to the pictures. According to the creators of the database, the existence of this image collection of normatively rated affective stimuli should: (1) allow better experimental control in the selection of emotional stimuli; (2) facilitate the comparison of results across several studies conducted in the same or different laboratory; and (3) encourage and allow exact replications within and across research labs who are assessing basic and applied problems in psychological science.Thus, the idea is to use the IAPS database to show a series of images to some volunteer participants. Each image used in the experiment has to belong to one of the two classes, namely, high arousal-low valence and low arousal-high valence, corresponding to distress and calm, respectively, according to the circumplex affect model by Russell [28]. Obviously, high arousal-low valence does not directly mean “distress”, as “alarmed, tense, afraid, angry, annoyed and frustrated” are also classified in this quarter of the circumference. In the opposite low arousal-high valence side we have pleased, glad, serene, content, atease, satisfied, relaxed and calm. For this reason, the images taken as representative for the calm condition have a described arousal level lower than 4 and a valence level between 4 and 6. Similarly, the negatively distressed condition consists in samples with an arousal level higher than 5 and a valence level lower than 3.The procedure for performing the experiment is described next. The participant sits in front of the experimentation monitor and the wearable is put in the wrist of the non-dominant hand (see Figure 1). In this regard, the experimentation monitor consists of a high resolution, 28 inch screen. When the technician verifies the proper functioning of the wearable and its communication with the software, the experiment starts. Firstly, the participant has to carefully read the general instructions of the experiment. Then, ten pictures that are labelled with high arousal and low valence are shown consecutively during 6 s each to the participant. Silences consisting of blank images with a fixed duration of 1 s are inserted before each picture used from the database.The pictures are selected randomly from the set of images that fulfil the condition. Therefore, the segment used for subsequent analysis is 70 s long (10 pictures × 6 s duration, plus one blank image before each picture). In this sense, a single presentation of many stimuli presented for a short period of time might favour the continuity of emotional state [29]. Afterwards, a distracting task is presented to the participant so that his/her emotional state comes to neutral. Next, the experiment continues by showing randomly another set of ten images from IAPS that fulfil the condition to be part of those previously labelled as low arousal and high valence. Therefore, two segments of data from each individual are finally obtained, one for calm condition and another for distress condition. Again, silences are used before each picture. Lastly, the distracting task is offered again.Thus, the total duration of the experiment for each participant is 140 s from the screening of the first image. The pauses are designed to allow the patient under study to recover from the previous stimulus. In this regard, the pictures are randomly shuffled, such that the order of viewing is different for each participant, albeit keeping the silence between two consecutive pictures. It is important to say that the experiments are carried out in the safest possible way. Accordingly, the participants are informed that they can stop visualizing the sequence in any moment. Moreover, the technician stays behind the participant during the whole experiment in order to assist at any time.3.2. Study PopulationFifty participants (28 men and 22 women, mean age 23.54 ± 2.64 years) have been enrolled in this experiment. All participants are informed about the high emotional contents of the pictures and they agree to be subjected themselves to the study. All participants are students from the Technical School at Cuenca, Spain. The scholars had to pass the PHQ-9 Depression Test Questionnaire to be accepted in the experiment. Unfortunately, four students were not approved, and one experiment was not valid due to technical problems. Thus, the number of valid experiments was forty-five (25 males and 20 females).This study was carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible institutional committee on human experimentation. All subjects gave written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
4. Methodology|After the experimentation, all signals are segmented and processed according to the time duration of the stimuli. Next, the most significant time, morphological and frequency features are extracted. Finally, diverse statistical analysis and classification techniques are applied with the objective of maximizing the performance.4.1. Signal ProcessingThe EDA raw signals are acquired from the wearable at a sampling rate of 10 Hz and a 12-bit resolution. These specifications are chosen to remain the EDA shape unaltered and to prevent distortions [19]. EDA signals result from the superposition of two different components, SCR and SCL. The sympathetic nervous system fires the sudomotor nerve, provoking the phasic response. Traditionally, the SCR intensity has been quantified after each elicited stimulus by detecting peaks directly on the EDA signal [19]. Next, the difference between a found peak and its preceding local minimum is assessed.However, depending on the stimuli, it is frequent that SCRs appear as bursts, such that an EDA signal is represented as a sequence of consecutive SCRs. In this case, the SCR boundaries remain masked by the preceding response. Indeed, SCRs may occur at the rise or decay of existing stimuli, making it very difficult to determine if these responses correspond to a new stimulus or are part of previous events. In this regard, some works have defined different strategies for all possible overlapping cases [30]. Nevertheless, the through-to-peak standard method may result in an underestimation of the amplitude of consecutive SCRs, depending on the closeness among responses [31]. Recently, new studies have addressed this problem by decomposing the EDA signal into its two components by using a deconvolution operation [31]. Despite this approach requires more intensive signal processing, it has reported better performance than others that process directly the EDA raw data. Consequently, a similar methodology is applied in this work. Thus, considering the raw data from the wearable as y[n], a new 1.5 Hz cut-off low-pass FIR filter with order N = 32 is applied over this signal in order to decrease the possible noise produced in the different electronic stages. The resulting filtered signal y^[n] is calculated by means of a discrete convolution as:y^[n]=C0y[n]+C1y[n−1]+...+CNy[n−N]=∑i=0NCiy[n−i](3)Next, a deconvolution operation is carried out to separate SCR and SCL components. The deconvolution is an algorithm-based process used to reverse the effects of combining signals by finding the solution to the convolution equation, such that:y^[n]=(r×l)[n]=∑i=0Nr[n−i]l[i](4)
being × the convolution operator in the time domain, y^[n] the filtered EDA signal, r[n] the required SCR and l[n] the SCL components. It is worth noting that l[n] corresponds to the transfer function in Equation (4), such that, if l[n] is known or estimated, a deterministic deconvolution could be used to compute the desired component r[n].In this regard, three different assumptions have been considered in this work. Firstly, the exact moments when the stimulus (picture) starts have been recorded as events, as can be observed in Figure 3b. Secondly, notice that the SCR component takes a while since the stimulus is fired until the sympathetic system reacts through filling the sweat glands, thus increasing the skin conductivity. Indeed, the exact time occurrence of SCR varies depending on skin type and genetic aspects [22]. Furthermore, the SCR duration varies subject to the stimulus’ nature and the participant’s reaction against such stimulus. Consequently, a fixed temporal window (5 s) is used as the time segment where the SCR response may occur, following the recommendations of a previous work [17]. Thus, a period from  + 1 to  + 6 s after the onset of each stimulus is considered. In third place, l[n] corresponds to y^[n] when no stimulus is elicited [19].Open in a separate windowFigure 3Different stages in EDA signal processing. (a) Raw EDA signal before filtering. (b) Raw EDA signal after low-pass filtering and stimuli onset. (c) Estimation of EDA baseline using a cubic spline approximation. (d) Skin conductivity response (SCR) obtained after the convolution process.Considering the aforementioned assumptions, the time intervals occurring before and after each phasic impulse are used to estimate the SCL gaps between the different phasic impulses. In this work, a cubic spline fit is used to approximate l[n] at the gaps produced in the SCR temporal window, as you may observe in Figure 3c. Once l[n] is known, r[n] can be computed by following the inverse process defined in Equation (4). Nevertheless, given the complexity of this operation in time, it is preferable to work in the frequency domain, where convolution and deconvolution become in simple multiplications and divisions. Thus, y^[n] and l[n] are transformed into the frequency domain by using the Fourier Fast Transforms (FFT), such that r[n] can be calculated as:r[n]F=y^[n]Fl[n]F(5)
being y^[n]F, r[n]F and l[n]F the FFTs of EDA signal, and SCR and SCL components, respectively. The original r[n] component alone is estimated by computing the inverse Fourier transform over r[n]F. As it can be observed in Figure 3d, r[n] corresponds to a signal with zero baseline, where each impulse reflects the activation of the sudomotor nerve.4.2. Feature SetsIn the present section, all the features are estimated. The characteristics related to time domain, frequency domain, statistics and morphological analysis are computed for each physiological variable. In this work, thirty six features are used, as you may observe in Table 1.Table 1Temporal, morphological and frequency features computed for EDA signals.AnalysisFeaturesTemporalMSC, SDSC, MASC, MISC, DRSC, FMSC, FDSC, SMSC, SDSCMorphologicalALSC, INSC, APSC, RMSC, ILSC, ELSC, KUSC, SKSC, KUSC, MOSCFrequencyF1SC, F2SC, F3SCOpen in a separate windowDifferent time-domain and frequency-domain markers are computed over the phasic component SCR to characterize the EDA signal. The SCL tonic component is out of scope of this study, since it uses to vary among different people due to physical and genetic aspects [19]. Firstly, a number of temporal metrics are computed over the SCR component. Thus, the mean (MSC), standard deviation (SDSC), maximum (MASC), minimum (MISC) and the dynamic range (DRSC), defined as the difference between MASC and MISC, are estimated. In order to highlight the sudden changes in the skin conductivity, the first and second derivative of SCR are also computed. Then, the mean (FMSC) and standard deviation (FDSC) of the first derivative and the mean (SMSC) and standard deviation (SDSC) of the second derivative are calculated.In addition, several morphological features are defined for SCR characterization. Thus, in order to identify the morphological alterations produced when SCRs are present in the EDA signal, the arc length (ALSC) is computed as:ALSC=∑n=2N1+(r[n]−r[n−1])2.(6)This parameter discerns between the presence or absence of SCR components, and it has been used previously in the morphological characterization of Gaussian responses [32]. Moreover, some parameters related to the SCR amplitude are also used to assess the activation of the sympathetic nervous system. Thus, the integral (INSC), normalized average power (APSC) and normalized root mean square (RMSC) of SCR are calculated as:INSC=∑n=1N|r[n]|,(7)
APSC=1N∑n=1Nr[n]2,(8)
RMSC=1N∑n=1Nr[n]2.(9)Furthermore, possible relationships between the amplitude and energy of the SCR signal with its arc length are studied. Thus, the area-perimeter (ILSC) and the energy-perimeter (ELSC) relationships are estimated as the ratio between INSC and RMSC with ALSC, respectively. Finally, high order skewness (SKSC) and kurtosis (KUSC) statistics, as well as the central moment (MOSC) are calculated on the SCR component. These metrics assess the symmetry and shape of a probability distribution, and can therefore be also considered as geometrical descriptors. Indeed, if an SCR is considered as a Gaussian distribution, SKSC indicates if the tail distribution is longer at the left or at the right relative to the normal distribution. Similarly, the SKSC shows the degree of peakedness or flatness of a distribution relative to the normal distribution.In regards to frequency aspects, the SCR component is transformed into the frequency domain by using a nonparametric FFT algorithm. Then, the spectral power in bandwidths 0.1 to 0.2 (F1SC), 0.2 to 0.3 (F2SC) and 0.3 to 0.4 (F3SC) Hz are estimated. These bands have been previously used in other studies [33].4.3. Statistical AnalysisShaphiro-Wilks and Levene tests have proved that the distributions are normal and homoscedastic for all the features studied. Consequently, the results are expressed in terms of the mean ± standard deviation for all the samples belonging to a same class. The statistical differences between both classes, calm and distress, are assessed by a one-way ANOVA test. A value of statistical significance ρ <  0.05 has been considered as significant.Moreover, a 10-fold stratified cross-validation is used to assess the discriminant ability of each feature. This kind of cross-validation allows to obtain a highly reliable performance generalization of the metric under study [34]. Indeed, this approach makes use of all available data both for training and testing. This avoids the possibility of the classification results to be highly dependent on the choice of a given training-test segmentation. Thus, the database is firstly partitioned into 10 equally sized folds, rearranging the data to ensure that each fold is a good representative of the whole. Then, 10 training and validation iterations are performed, such that a fold of the data is held out for test, whereas the other ones are used for learning within each iteration. For each learning set, a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve is used to obtain the optimal discriminant threshold between calm and distress condition. The ROC curve is created by plotting the true positive (TP) rate against the false positive (FP) rate at various threshold settings. Here, the TP rate (or sensitivity) is considered as the percentage of distress condition correctly classified. On the other hand, the FP rate (or one-specificity) corresponds to the rate of calm individuals improperly identified. The optimal threshold is selected as the value which provides the highest accuracy. Finally, the global precision is obtained by averaging this procedure 10 times.Additionally, the relationships among the different temporal, morphological and frequency features are analysed by means of decision trees. In brief, the algorithm starts taking into account all the input data, examining all the possible splits on each feature. Then, the split with the best optimization criterion, based on the Gini diversity index [35], is chosen. In this respect, the Gini index is commonly computed by using the Lorenz curve, and it is expressed mathematically as:G=aa+b(10)
where G corresponds to the Gini index, a represents the area that lies between the line of equality and the Lorenz curve and b represents the area under the Lorenz curve. Thus, a node containing observations from just one group (pure node) has Gini index 0, while if the node contains observations from both groups (impure node), the Gini index is a positive number, ranging between 0 and 1. Finally, when the split has been executed, the aforementioned process is repeated recursively for the two child nodes using the remaining data. It is worth noting that some stopping rules are imposed to prevent tree overgrowth. Thus, the growth of every tree is always stopped when any node only contains samples from a group of subjects (pure node) or less than 20% of all samples.
5. Results|Table 2 shows the mean and standard deviation of the features calculated. Only those markers reporting statistical differences throughout a one-way ANOVA test are presented.Table 2Results obtained from skin conductance response (SCR). Mean and standard deviation values for emotional states of calm and distress, and statistical significance (ρ), for all parameters are presented.FeatureCalm ConditionDistress Condition
ρ
AcronymMean ± StdMean ± Std
MSC5.5339 ± 4.222813.0193 ± 8.62011.03  ×  10−5SDSC4.4618 ± 4.897612.5249 ± 9.03401.33  ×  10−5MASC28.6079 ± 27.4469.4104 ± 48.03102.68  ×  10−5DRSC28.5653 ± 27.466069.3719 ± 48.01452.67  ×  10−5FDSC0.9932 ± 0.96652.2660 ± 1.67561.50  ×  10−4ALSC1.4049  × 104 ± 99.68091.4153  ×  104 ± 279.79890.0175INSC193.9833 ± 148.3517457.2628 ± 304.90611.11  ×  10−5APSC4.6324 ± 9.218123.8873 ± 36.43450.0026RMSC7.3106 ± 6.347618.0970 ± 12.42651.20  ×  10−5ILSC5.5067 ± 4.148012.8120 ± 8.20067.31  ×  10−6ELSC0.0065 ± 0.01290.0330 ± 0.04840.002SKSC1.8838 ± 1.18823.1146 ± 0.71590.0031MOSC2.2337 ± 5.069411.7973 ± 19.79300.0057F1SC2.9219 ± 5.438014.1513 ± 20.29890.0018F2SC0.1631 ± 0.29841.4143 ± 2.17678.99  ×  10−4F3SC0.1391 ± 0.32311.2288 ± 2.39070.0076Open in a separate windowConcerning the study of the SCR component, 16 out of 22 features report significant differences. In this respect, higher values of skin conductivity are observed in the distress class regarding the calm class for all temporal parameters. From a statistical point of view, all temporal parameters achieve a comparable power discrimination between both classes. On the other hand, a number of morphological markers are defined and used in this analysis. Most of them show an important discriminatory power. It is worth noting that ILSC achieves the most remarkable trends, while ALSC reports the lowest significance. Just like in the temporal parameters, the average values of the morphological markers show an increasing pattern, such that higher skin conductivities are observed in distress compared to calm condition. Regarding the frequency parameters, all the markers report a power increase when the subjects are elicited with stressing stimuli. In this regard, F2SC experiences the highest difference between the classes, achieving a considerable statistical significance.In order to estimate a reliable and robust classification accuracy for each studied parameter, the stratified 10-fold cross-validation is run five times. Thus, the average values of sensitivity, specificity and accuracy, reported by each marker and for both training and test subsets iterations, are shown in Table 3.Table 3Sensitivity (Se), specificity (Sp) and accuracy (Ac) for all the parameters under study and for training and test subsets.FeatureLearningTestAcronymSe (%)Sp (%)Ac (%)Se (%)Sp (%)Ac (%)MSC75.9583.1079.5269.0076.7872.95SDSC85.0678.9582.4378.5776.0777.38MASC81.4576.3578.9174.0772.2873.34DRSC82.9275.4279.1876.6471.0073.62FDSC74.5880.4377.5069.2174.8571.81ALSC72.1576.8674.5270.9275.6473.19APSC84.9879.8882.4379.9278.7179.28RMSC85.9278.9282.4281.5778.8579.94ILSC85.1279.7182.4281.7878.1479.99ELSC71.7873.1472.2563.0075.3569.16SKSC77.4481.0879.2973.2875.7174.53MOSC86.1978.7582.5075.2875.2175.18F1SC77.1577.9477.5774.8575.8575.38F2SC85.2985.9385.6184.9278.5081.61F3SC85.1279.7182.4280.3576.4278.30Open in a separate windowThe classification results are in agreement with the discriminatory power obtained previously. Thus, all the temporal parameters computed over SCR component achieve a similar global accuracy, ranging from 71% to 73%. Similarly, morphological parameters computed over SCR component reach similar performance with global accuracy varying between 73% and 75%. Nevertheless, the energetic parameters APSC and RMSC show a very notable classification accuracy, reaching a correctness of 79.28% and 79.94%, respectively. In agreement with the discriminatory power shown before, the arc length (ALSC) achieves the worst performance in the classification. On the contrary, the area-perimeter marker ILSC reports the highest global accuracy among the morphological features, achieving a precision of 79.99%. Finally, frequency markers show a very notable performance, where F2SC reaches the highest global accuracy among all the studied parameters. It is important to remark that almost all markers show a good balance between sensitivity and specificity. Nevertheless, some remarkable parameters state a slight increase in sensibility, i.e. an increase in the ability of detecting distress condition. Hence, RMSC, ILSC, F2SC and F3SC report sensibility values higher than 80%.Considering this context, a series of tree-based classification models are programmed in order to study the possible relationships among the different parameters. Here we present the tree-based discriminant model that reaches the highest performance. This model is constructed by exclusively considering temporal and morphological features. In this case, the frequency parameters are excluded, thinking in a lighter algorithmic model only focused in analyzing the time domain. In this model, a threshold value of 4.4830 on SDSC parameter in this model serves to divide into two subgroups. Then, one of the subgroups is assessed by means of SKSC parameter, taking value 3.1102 as classification threshold. This tree-based model achieves a sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of 93.9%, 85.36% and 89.18%, respectively. In this regard, the model improves the global correctness more than 8%, regarding the performance of the best single parameter F2SC. It is also important to highlight that sensitivity, that is, the ability to discriminate distress condition, improves over 9%.
6. Conclusions|A recent paper [36] says that “Stress is a very complex subject and measuring stress is not an easy task. There are many markers that could be used, many algorithms that could be applied, and many forms of stress which could be observed”. Moreover, an important number of works can be found in the literature based in distress detection. Although comparison among works should always be considered with caution, since different ways to provoke the stress may trigger several cognitive processes [22], it is worth noting that the present study has achieved a comparable performance to other systems aimed at classifying calm and distress emotional states. Thus, while this work has reported a global accuracy around 89% when classifying calm and distress condition, other works based on electrodermal activity as reported in very interesting reviews on wearable sensors for remote health monitoring [37,38,39], state stress detection rates ranging from 75% to 95% [40,41,42,43]. Nevertheless, complex classifiers have been used to improve their performance.For instance, an approach throws a precision of 75% using EDA after classifying with k-means, Gaussian mixture models, SVM and decision trees [44].On the other hand, it is important to highlight that these and/or other approaches have used an important number of features from more than one physiological sensor to calculate the stress degree. For instance, electroencephalogram, electrocardiogram and facial cameras complement EDA signals to reach an accuracy of 68% [45]. The classification is performed by means of support vector machines (SVM) and naive Bayes classifier. In another approach [46], heart rate variability (HRV) supplements EDA to obtain 78% of precision, also using SVM classifiers. Two other papers using EDA and HRV reach an accuracy of 97.3% [10] and 80% [47], respectively. However, in the first article [10] a driving task is analysed with a series of sensors: hand and foot EDA, together with three other physiological measurements, namely HRV, Trapezius muscle electromyography and respiration. Moreover, the other work [47] uses EDA, blood pressure, HRV, eye gaze and pupil dilation. Another work with three physiological measurements [48], which are HRV, skin temperature and EDA, gets a precision of 91.2%. In another work [49], a portable embedded device to measure the accumulated stress level is designed. This device uses EDA and HRV with electrocardiograph or photoplethysmograph signals to obtain an accurate stress level.On the contrary, our proposal uses only features from SRC to achieve a high performance that is comparable to the most remarkable works. In this sense, the most outstanding aspect of our contribution is the development of the necessary hardware, signal processing and classification model to deploy a wearable device with a high ability to discriminate between the two considered states. The simplicity of the classification model and the lightness of the signal processing approach enables this device to work in real-time and long-term. Another relevant aspect is that almost all the features computed on the SCR component show some degree of relevance in the classification.For the sake of comparability and reproducibility of the experiment described in this study, a DC-EXM method has been chosen for the acquisition of EDA signals. Indeed, most of the works using EDA, and found in scientific literature, have been performed by means of this methodology [19]. Although ESM approaches may provide some advantages over the EXM methods, as, for instance, no need of additional amplification and coupling circuitry, the output signal generated is biphasic or even triphasic, which difficult considerably the interpretation and further processing of the data [19]. From a point of view of electronic design, many efforts have been made to standardize the use of constant voltage versus constant current sources when using DC-EXM methodology. Despite constant voltage directly providing conductance values, there is no consensus in the literature about its generalized use, because the conductance value can be obtained easily with constant current sources if SCL is also measured. In this aspect, the design of constant current sources are preferred because they are easier to design and present less tolerance than constant voltage variants.Finally, some limitations should be considered. First of all, the wearable prototype has been tested in laboratory conditions enrolling exclusively young subjects. Therefore, the results of this work can not be generalized directly to the entire population. With the aim of validating the results obtained, people of all ages will be enrolled in future studies. Furthermore, a sequence of 10 consecutive pictures with lengths of 6 s have been used as stimuli in this work. Considering such duration for visualization, the cognitive dimension of exploration of images during the 6 s may affect the outcomes. In this line, there is no consensus about which type of stimulus (image, sound, or video clip) and duration is the most adequate to elicit certain emotional states [22]. Moreover, it should be noted that the same order of condition high arousal-low valence—low arousal-high valence could affect, which could suppose an experimental bias.
Acknowledgments|This work was partially supported by Spanish Ministerio de Economía, Industria y Competitividad, Agencia Estatal de Investigación (AEI)/European Regional Development Fund (FEDER, UE) under DPI2016-80894-R grant. Arturo Martínez-Rodrigo holds an EPC 2016-2017 research fund from Escuela Politécnica de Cuenca, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha.
Abbreviations|The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:EDAelectrodermal activityIAPSInternational Affective Picture SystemSCLskin conductance levelSCRskin conductance responseSMNAsudomotor nerve activity
Author Contributions|R.Z. and A.M.R. designed the wearable; R.Z., A.M.-R., J.M.P., M.T.L. and A.F.-C. conceived, designed and performed the experiments; R.Z., A.M.-R., J.M.P., M.T.L. and A.F.-C. analyzed the data; R.Z., A.M.-R. and A.F.-C. wrote the paper.
Conflicts of Interest|The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Abstract|A key mutational process in cancer is structural variation, in which rearrangements delete, amplify or reorder genomic segments that range in size from kilobases to whole chromosomes1,2,3,4,5,6,7. Here we develop methods to group, classify and describe somatic structural variants, using data from the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) Consortium of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), which aggregated whole-genome sequencing data from 2,658 cancers across 38 tumour types8. Sixteen signatures of structural variation emerged. Deletions have a multimodal size distribution, assort unevenly across tumour types and patients, are enriched in late-replicating regions and correlate with inversions. Tandem duplications also have a multimodal size distribution, but are enriched in early-replicating regions—as are unbalanced translocations. Replication-based mechanisms of rearrangement generate varied chromosomal structures with low-level copy-number gains and frequent inverted rearrangements. One prominent structure consists of 2–7 templates copied from distinct regions of the genome strung together within one locus. Such cycles of templated insertions correlate with tandem duplications, and—in liver cancer—frequently activate the telomerase gene TERT. A wide variety of rearrangement processes are active in cancer, which generate complex configurations of the genome upon which selection can act.
Main|Mutations that arise in somatic cells are the driving force of cancer development. Structural variation—in which genomic rearrangement acts to amplify, delete or reorder chromosomal material at scales that range from single genes to entire chromosomes—is an especially important class of somatic mutation. Previous analyses of both cancer and germline genomes have enabled the description of several distinctive patterns of structural variants1,2,3,4,5,6,7, and hypotheses about the underlying basis of several of these patterns have been proposed on the basis of their clustering, orientation and associated copy-number changes. Hypothesis-driven in vitro studies are now beginning to reveal some of the mechanistic processes that generate these structures9,10,11,12,13, and generate further predictions that can be assessed in the genomic data. However, the landscape of structural variation in human cancer remains incompletely mapped and there are many complex structures that elude formal description.The PCAWG Consortium aggregated whole-genome sequencing data from 2,658 cancers across 38 tumour types, generated by the ICGC and TCGA projects. These sequencing data were aligned to the human genome (reference build hs37d5) and analysed with standardized, high-accuracy pipelines to call somatic and germline variants of all classes8. Here, we analyse the patterns and signatures of structural variants across the PCAWG data. We propose a working classification scheme that encompasses known and newly identified classes of structural variants. We develop methods for annotating the observed structural variants in a given cancer genome, identifying a class of replication-based rearrangement processes that generate clusters of several structural variants. We explore the size, activity and genome-wide distribution of classifiable structural variant types across the cohort, using signature analysis to define how they correlate within patients. Other papers produced by PCAWG address complementary aspects of structural variants, including inference of positive selection acting on recurrently rearranged regions of the genome14, how structural variants affect the transcriptome15 and chromosome topology16, patterns of somatic retrotransposition17 and distribution of chromothripsis across cancer types18.
Classification of structural variants|A ‘structural variant’ manifests as a ‘junction’ between two ‘breakpoints’ in the genome (terms in inverted commas here and below refer to those defined in the glossary in Extended Data Table 1). Generally, there will be a change in copy number across a given breakpoint if only one side of the break is rescued by a structural variant; if both sides of a double-stranded DNA break are rescued, a ‘reciprocal’ or ‘balanced’ structural variant will result, without substantial copy-number change. We sometimes observe ‘clusters of structural variants’ in which several breakpoints occur close together, in time or in genomic space—usually both. Such spatial and/or temporal proximity generally, but not always, implies that the structural variants within a cluster are mechanistically linked. Clusters can be ‘phased’ (in which case all structural variants in the cluster resolve to a single derivative chromosome) or ‘unphased’, in which case the structural variants are carried on different derivative chromosomes. An example of the latter is a reciprocal translocation that results in two derivative chromosomes, each with a single interchromosomal breakpoint junction (Fig. 1).Fig. 1: Classification of structural variants in cancer genomes.Schematics of major structural-variant (SV) classes, grouped according to whether they are simple or complex and arise through cut-and-paste or copy-and-paste processes. Each schematic comprises three parts. The top segment shows dotted arcs for each rearrangement junction that joins two chromosomal segments together. The middle segment shows the copy number of genomic segments that are involved. The bottom segment shows the configuration of the final derivative chromosome that results from the structural variant; the colour of the segments corresponds to the colour of that segment in the copy-number schematic. + indicates the different derivative chromosomes created for some of the classes: that is, the structural variants are not phased to a single derivative.Full size imageWe recognize distinct ‘classes of structural variant’ from the orientation of the two segments at the junction and associated copy-number changes (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 1). Some classes of structural variant (such as isochromosomes and rearrangements between extended, highly homologous sequences) are difficult to detect with short-read sequencing data; these classes are not considered further here. We propose categorizing classes of structural variant across two facets: the number of breakpoints involved (simple or complex) and by whether the patterns are likely to arise from ‘cut-and-paste’ or ‘copy-and-paste’ rearrangement processes. A cut-and-paste process generates a cluster of structural variants consistent with reshuffling or loss of extant genomic segments, and a copy-and-paste process is one in which copies of genomic ‘templates’ are newly replicated or synthesized and inserted during the rearrangement process. Deletions, reciprocal inversions, unbalanced translocations and reciprocal translocations are examples of simple cut-and-paste structural variants, as they can be reconstructed from the incorrect religation of chromosomal breaks. Tandem duplications are simple copy-and-paste structural variants, as they arise through the local insertion of a newly generated extra copy of a genomic template.More-complex cut-and-paste processes that produce structural variants also occur in cancer. ‘Breakage–fusion–bridge’ events result from cycles of DNA breakage, end-to-end sister chromatid fusions, mitotic bridges and further DNA breakage. These events manifest as one or a few proximate, inverted breakpoint junctions with associated copy-number change, which we call ‘fold-back inversions’1,2,19 (Fig. 1). ‘Chromoplexy’5,20—which is particularly frequent in prostate cancers—results from several simultaneous double-stranded DNA breaks in several chromosomes that are rejoined incorrectly, leading to balanced chains of rearrangements. ‘Chromothripsis’3, in which chromosome shattering and rearrangement occur in a single catastrophic event9,21, leads to a pattern of oscillating copy-number changes and localized clustering of tens to hundreds of breakpoints22.In the germline, more-complex copy-and-paste classes of structural variant have previously been described, which involve small duplications and triplications and are thought to arise from the stalling of the replication fork leading to template switching4,23,24. Here we describe a wide range of complex copy-and-paste types of somatic structural variant that occur in human cancers, and that are typically characterized by copy-number gains and frequent inverted rearrangements.
Annotation of structural-variant classes|We analysed 2,559 whole cancer genomes across 38 tumour types (alongside matched germline DNA) that passed the most stringent PCAWG quality-control criteria: 1 or more somatic structural variants were detected in 2,429 tumours8. As described in an accompanying Article8, structural variants were identified using aberrantly mapping and/or split reads in paired-end sequencing data25. We used four somatic structural-variant callers20,25,26,27, and the final structural-variant dataset comprised events that were returned by ≥2 callers, merged by a graph-based consensus method8. We consider only somatically acquired structural variants in this analysis, and exclude somatic retrotransposition events. Validation of structural-variant calls was undertaken using both manual inspection and pull-down with resequencing of breakpoints. With these approaches, we estimate the sensitivity of the consensus structural-variant call set to be 90% for true calls generated by any 1 of the 4 callers; specificity was estimated as 97.5%8. A mean of 3.22 algorithms of the 4 that we used called each structural variant in the consensus set genome-wide, and this differed little across repetitive elements: the mean for short interspersed nuclear elements was 3.22, and the mean for long interspersed nuclear elements was 3.21.Because the structural variants from a given cancer are often highly clustered, we grouped rearrangements into clusters on the basis of the proximity of breakpoints, the overall number of events in that genome and the size distribution of these events (Supplementary Methods). Essentially, a particular cluster contains structural variants that are significantly closer together than expected by chance, given the overall number and orientation of structural variants in that patient. Alongside the clustering, we computed an in silico library of all possible genomic configurations that result from sequential simple structural variants (deletions, tandem duplications, inversions, translocations, and chromosome duplications or losses), to a depth of five rearrangements. We could then compare the genomic configuration of each observed cluster of structural variants against the library to determine how it might have arisen.This methodology has the advantage that breakpoint junctions are classified according to the wider genomic context in which they occur. This means that, for example, true deletions will be identifiably different from breakpoint junctions that happen to have a deletion-type orientation but arise within (for instance) a chromothripsis event of markedly different mechanism and properties. Over half the breakpoint junctions that we observed arise within clusters of several or many structural variants (Fig. 2a): removing these junctions from the catalogues of true deletions, tandem duplications and inversions enables a more-precise description of the properties of simple structural variants.Fig. 2: Frequency of structural-variant classes across tumour types.a, Violin plots of density of classified structural-variant categories across patients within each histology group. Tumour type panels are sorted in descending order of the average number of structural-variant breakpoints per sample. Within each tumour type, the frequency distribution (y axis) of different structural-variant categories (x axis) across patients is shown as a density: regions of highest density have the greatest width of shaded area. In each panel, the number of patients is indicated at the top right. AdenoCA, adenocarcinoma; BNHL, B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma; ChRCC, chromophobe renal cell carcinoma; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; CNS, central nervous system; GBM, glioblastoma; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; leiomyo, leiomyosarcoma; medullo, medulloblastoma; MPN, myeloproliferative neoplasm; eso, oesophageal; oligo, oligodendrocytic; panc, pancreatic; piloastro, pilocytic astrocytoma; prost, prostate; RCC, renal cell carcinoma; sarc, sarcoma; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma; TCC, transitional cell carcinoma; thy, thyroid. b, Per-sample counts of complex (bottom) and classified (top) structural-variant breakpoint junctions for oesophageal adenocarcinoma. c, Per-sample counts of complex (bottom) and classified (top) structural-variant breakpoint junctions for ovarian adenocarcinoma.Full size imageAmong the classes of simple structural variants, deletion was the most common, followed by tandem duplication and then unbalanced translocation. Reciprocal translocations and reciprocal inversions were uncommon events (Fig. 2a). There was considerable variability in the overall numbers and distribution of classes of structural variant across tumour types and across patients within a given tumour type (Extended Data Fig. 1). For example, oesophageal adenocarcinomas were characterized by many deletions and a large number of complex clustered rearrangements (Fig. 2b), and ovarian cancers often carried high numbers of tandem duplications and/or deletions with moderate numbers of unbalanced translocations (Fig. 2c).
Cycles of templated insertions|We next examined clusters that contain 2–10 structural variants. One newly identified configuration consisted of several segments of copy-number gains, typically on different reference chromosomes, linked together through structural variants (Fig. 3, Extended Data Fig. 2). A sequential path through consecutive segments can be formed by following the breakpoint junctions, which suggests that each cluster represents a string of duplicated templates inserted into a single derivative chromosome, probably acquired concurrently. Although it is theoretically possible that the structural variants in such clusters are not phased on the same derivative chromosome or do not occur concurrently, we think this is unlikely for several reasons. First, we found examples of RNA transcripts that spliced together exons separated by two junctions in the structural-variant cluster (Supplementary Fig. 2), which suggests that they are phased on the same derivative chromosome. Second, long-read sequencing data (reported in an accompanying Article8) supported the phasing of structural variants that link templated insertions. Third, we found that the clonal fraction of tumour cells tended to be more similar for structural variants within these clusters than for randomly chosen structural variants in each patient (Supplementary Fig. 3), which suggests that they co-occur in evolutionary time. Fourth, the level of copy-number gain for individual segments in the cluster tended to be identical (Fig. 3, Extended Data Fig. 2).Fig. 3: Chains, cycles and bridges of templated insertions.a–c, Examples of a typical cycle (a), chain (b) and bridge (c) of templated insertions. The estimated copy-number profile is shown as in Fig. 1, with structural variants shown as dotted arcs linking two copy-number segments. The derivative chromosome(s) that could explain the copy-number and structural-variant profile is shown below. d, e, Cycles of templated insertions that affect the TERT gene, in two hepatocellular carcinomas. KIAA1024 is also known as MINAR1.Full size imageWe define three basic categories on the basis of whether or not the string of inserted segments returns to the original chromosome: we term strings of inserted segments that do not return ‘chains’ of templated insertions and those strings that do return ‘bridges’ (which leave a gap on the host chromosome) or ‘cycles’ (which rereplicate a segment on the host chromosome). In the PCAWG dataset overall, we observed 1,467 cycles and 1,275 bridges of templated insertions (Fig. 3a, b, Extended Data Fig. 2). In chains of templated insertions, the string of genomic segments does not return to the chromosome of departure (Fig. 3c, Extended Data Fig. 2) but it is similarly associated with copy-number gains at each templated segment. There were 285 instances of such chains in the dataset, commonly manifesting as unbalanced translocations joined through one or more intermediary templated insertions.Most templated insertion events involve only two breakpoint junctions, but this can extend to three, four or more linked rearrangements (Extended Data Fig. 3a). The longest such event—from a cervical squamous cell cancer—had seven templated insertions strung together on an eighth host chromosome (Fig. 3c; other examples of long templated insertion events are shown in Extended Data Fig. 3).
Templated insertions that affect TERT
|Structural variants drive tumour development through their effects on cancer genes, whether by altering gene copy number, disrupting tumour-suppressor genes, creating fusion genes or juxtaposing the coding sequence of one gene with the regulatory apparatus of another. We found that many liver cancers had cycles of templated insertions that affect TERT (Fig. 3d, e, Extended Data Fig. 4). Point mutations in the TERT promoter are present in 54% of liver cancers, and a further 5–10% of liver cancers have structural variants that activate the gene28. Of the 30 patients with liver cancer that had structural variants that affect TERT, we find that 10 of these variants were templated insertion events (mostly cycles). All of these events duplicated the entire TERT gene and linked it to duplications of whole genes, fragments of genes or regulatory elements from elsewhere in the genome, and led to increased expression of TERT (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Thus, this particular rearrangement process is distinctive for the precision with which cancer copy-and-pastes normally disparate functional elements of its genome together without wholesale instability.Tumour-suppressor genes were also inactivated by templated insertions (Extended Data Fig. 5). For example, among many straightforward deletions, RB1 was hit by cycles of templated insertions, a templated insertion with deletion and one instance of the linked, inverted duplications detailed in ‘Local n-jumps and local–distant clusters’. These events typically generated duplications of internal exons in RB1 and/or insertions of exons from other genes, all of which presumably rendered a non-functional transcript.
Local n-jumps and local–distant clusters|Many clusters of 2–10 structural variants in the dataset were confined to a single genomic region. Of those clusters that comprised two local rearrangements, some had straightforward explanations, such as nested or adjacent tandem duplications. However, many did not have a trivial explanation (Fig. 4a). These included a duplication–inverted-triplication–duplication structure that has previously been observed in germline structural variants24 (349 instances); a structure of two duplications linked by inverted rearrangements (531 instances); and structures of copy-number loss plus nearby duplication linked by inverted rearrangements (472 instances). All of these patterns had solutions in which breakpoints were phased to a single derivative chromosome (Fig. 4a), although non-phased solutions are theoretically possible (if unlikely). Beyond clusters of two rearrangements (two-jumps), we also found examples involving three, four or more rearrangements confined to one genomic locale (Fig. 4b). All of these configurations of clusters of structural variants can be phased to a single derivative chromosome, with tightly grouped breakpoints.Fig. 4: Examples of clusters of 2–5 rearrangements seen in human cancers.a, Structures created by two local rearrangements that cannot easily be explained by simple structural-variant classes (which we call local 2-jumps). The estimated copy-number profile is shown as in Fig. 1, with structural variants shown as dotted arcs linking two copy-number segments. Possible configurations of the derivative chromosome are shown below; multiple solutions are possible for each example. Dup, duplication; invDup, duplication linked by inverted rearrangement; trp, triplication. b, Structures created by 3–4 local rearrangements that cannot easily be explained by simple structural-variant categories. c, Structures created by one local rearrangement and one rearrangement that reaches elsewhere in the genome (local–distant clusters).Full size imageBeyond clusters confined to a single genomic region, we found clusters of 2–10 structural variants that combined local jumps with rearrangements that reach into one or more distant regions of the genome (Fig. 4c). Simple examples of these events include unbalanced translocations or large deletions with a locally derived fragment inserted at the breakpoint, but there was also an extensive range of more-complex patterns. In some cases, the source of the inserted fragment was distal to the major break, and the structural variant could feasibly result from several concurrent DNA breaks in close spatial proximity to the capture of a short DNA fragment during repair (cut-and-paste). In other cases, the origin of the inserted fragment was proximal to the major break and associated with a gain in copy number. This pattern is difficult to explain by a cut-and-paste mechanism, because the copy-number gain implies the inserted segment was a duplicate of the original template rather than a separated fragment redistributed from its original locus. Instead, a copy-and-paste mechanism may be the more parsimonious explanation for these events.A comparison of local footprints linked together through distant rearrangements revealed a strong connectivity of footprints with the same or similar structure, often enriched tenfold or more than expected by chance (see ‘Footprint connectivity analysis’ in Supplementary Results). The reasons for this are unclear, but it may reflect innate structural symmetry introduced through the generation or the resolution of rearrangements, or through the repeated action of a mechanism that imparts consistent structural motifs.
Copy-and-paste patterns of clusters|The diverse patterns of 2–10 clustered structural variants (Figs. 3, 4) share important morphological features: (1) genomic configurations that can be phased to a single derivative chromosome; (2) low-level gains in copy number, especially duplications and triplications; (3) a high frequency of inverted rearrangements in addition to noninverted rearrangements; (4) occurrence on a chromosome background with similar average copy number to the tumour overall; and (5) tight proximity of breakpoints within the local footprint (typically <1 Mb).Using our in silico library of genomic configurations, we could define all possible routes by which sequential structural variants could generate these structures through the classically defined repertoire of deletion, tandem duplication, inversion and translocation (Supplementary Fig. 4). These routes typically would require implausible machinations of chromosomes (Supplementary Results). In particular, the high prevalence of inverted breakpoint junctions and local copy-number gains is difficult to recreate using sequential simple rearrangements. Simple inversion events are uncommon in cancers (Fig. 1d) and they tend not to generate copy-number gains, except through breakage–fusion–bridge cycles: these latter also cause terminal deletions2, which are not seen in the events discussed here.If these events cannot be satisfactorily explained by sequential simple rearrangements, another possible explanation is a complex cut-and-paste mechanism such as chromothripsis, chromoplexy or repeated breakage–fusion–bridge cycles. However, the patterns of the 2–10 clustered structural variants do not fit with these processes either (Supplementary Results). Although chromothripsis with copy-number gain has previously been described3,11,19,22, the resulting copy number and rearrangement patterns have different properties to those we observed. Chromoplexy, in which chromosome breaks lead to a balanced interchange at multiple breakpoint junctions5,20, typically generates unphased solutions. Repeated breakage–fusion–bridge cycles tend to cause high-level copy-number gains associated with inverted, fold-back rearrangements1,2, unlike the structures reported here.Instead, we believe that many of these locally complex clusters of structural variants with low-level copy-number gains are generated in a single event by a copy-and-paste process. That is, the copying of genomic templates is an intrinsic aspect of the structural variation process in these events, with the extra copies being inserted in the resulting derivative chromosome. If the genomic templates all originate locally, we would observe local n-jumps (such as in Fig. 3a, b) with a tight clustering of breakpoints, phased solutions, frequent copy-number gains and a mix of inverted and noninverted breakpoint junctions. If the original templates for the copied segments derive from across the genome, chains, cycles and bridges of templated insertions would arise (Fig. 2).
Genomic properties of structural variants|The size of tandem duplications and deletions followed complex—often multimodal—distributions across tumour types (Fig. 5a, Extended Data Fig. 6a). However, as previously reported6,29, individual patients tend to have a simpler—usually unimodal—distribution of deletions or tandem duplications (Extended Data Fig. 6b), which implies that the complexity seen in a given tumour type results from combining samples with different profiles. The sizes of individual fragments in templated insertion events were also distinctly multimodal, with varying peak heights across tumour types (Fig. 5b). When correlating template sizes within a given event, two patterns emerged: one in which template sizes were closely correlated with one another, and one in which a small (<1 kb) template was linked with one of any size (Extended Data Fig. 7a, b). Likewise, the sizes of segments within a given local two-jump event showed moderately strong correlations with one another (Extended Data Fig. 7c).Fig. 5: Size distribution and genomic properties of classified structural variants.a, Size distribution of deletions per histology group, with tumour types ordered according to total number of events seen. Vertical dashed lines represent the two prominent modes. b, Size distribution of segments of templated insertion per histology group. For each tumour type, the three distributions for cycles, bridges and chains of templated insertions are superimposed. Ins, insertion. c, Associations between a subset of the genomic properties (rows) and classes of structural variant (columns). Each density curve represents the quantile distribution of the genomic property values at observed breakpoints compared to random genome positions. Asterisks indicate a significant departure from uniform quantiles after multiple hypothesis correction on a one-sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov test based on a sample size of 2,559 genomes containing structural variants: *false-discovery rate < 0.01, **false-discovery rate < 0.001, ***false-discovery rate < 10−6. Cells with significant property associations are shaded by the magnitude of the shift of the median observed quantile above (blue) or below (red) 0.5. The interpretation of each property from left to right is indicated by the axes to the right of the property label. Complex uncl, complex clusters unclassified; cplxy, chromoplexy; del, deletion; inv, inversion; ins, insertion; LAD, lamina-associated domain; recip, reciprocal; TAD, topologically associated domain; TD, tandem duplication; trans, translocation; unbal, unbalanced. d, Rearrangement counts as a function of bases of junction microhomology, fit to three linear functions consistent with different formation mechanisms. NHEJ, non-homologous end joining; MMEJ, microhomology-mediated end joining; SSA, single-strand annealing. e, Enrichment or depletion of breakpoint junctions between regions of the genome with particular annotations, compared with a permuted background that preserves breakpoint positions but swaps breakpoint partners. Centre points are the mean fold change over the permuted background; error bars represent three s.d. Analysis is based on a sample size of 2,559 genomes containing structural variants. LTR, long terminal repeat; SINE, short interspersed nuclear element; LINE, long interspersed nuclear element; heterochrom, heterochromatin.Full size imageA number of genomic properties (such as replication timing, transcriptional activity and chromatin state) influence the density of point mutations30,31 and copy-number alterations32, but how this relates to individual classes of structural variant is unclear. From the literature, we compiled a library of the genome-wide distribution of 38 features including replication timing, GC content, repeat density, gene density and distance to G-quadruplex motifs, among others. Replication timing had the strongest association with the occurrence of structural variants; deletions are enriched in late-replicating regions, and tandem duplications and unbalanced translocations occur preferentially in early-replicating regions (Fig. 5c, Extended Data Fig. 8). For individual patients with high numbers of deletions or tandem duplications, we observed notable heterogeneity in the distribution of these structural variants according to replication timing: some had events that occurred predominantly in late-replicating regions, others had events that occurred exclusively in early-replicating regions, and in others events were distributed more evenly (Supplementary Fig. 5). Regions of active chromatin and increased gene density correlated positively with the rate of rearrangement.A structural variant requires DNA repair pathways to join two sequences together, and several repair mechanisms are available to somatic cells. Some require sequence homology between the two ends, and others can operate to join non-homologous sequences. As previously reported2,25,33, we find across the PCAWG data that many structural variants do not have sequence homology at the breakpoint junction (Fig. 5d) and therefore arise through non-homologous end joining. Nonetheless, a sizable fraction of structural variants has more microhomology than expected by chance, with an apparently bimodal distribution of microhomology lengths. One set of structural variants has 2–7 bp of microhomology, probably generated by microhomology-mediated end joining, and a second set of structural variants has 10–30 bp of microhomology, probably generated through single-strand annealing or other forms of homologous recombination (including microhomology-mediated break-induced replication). Repetitive sequences in the genome, such as short and long interspersed nuclear elements, are the likely substrate of such structural variants, and we find enrichment for structural variants joining such elements (Fig. 5e, Supplementary Fig. 6).
Signatures of structural variation|The heterogeneous spectrum of point mutations across cancers can be reconstructed from the differential action of a relatively limited repertoire of mutational processes, each with a characteristic signature34. The differences across patients in the size distribution of tandem duplication and deletion—together with the widely varying frequency and patterns of structural variant across tumour types and genome topology—suggested that we could similarly learn such correlations across individual classes of structural variant.We divided the set of structural variants of each patient into mutually exclusive categories. We split the most frequent classes of simple structural variant (deletions and tandem duplications) into 11 categories according to size, replication timing and occurrence at fragile sites. Other configurations of structural variants and copy-number changes seen more than 50 times in the cohort were included as further categories, including cycles, chains and bridges of templated insertions (also split by size), local n-jumps and local–distant clusters.We applied two methods for signature discovery, which yielded comparable results. We identified 16 structural-variant signatures: the 12 most prevalent of these signatures are shown in Fig. 6a. Signature extraction on the cohort randomly split into two halves identified ten highly correlated signatures (Supplementary Fig. 7), which closely matched the signatures called in the full cohort despite the lower power. Three signatures of deletions emerged, split by size: the signature of small (<50-kb) deletions included small reciprocal inversions and the signature of large (>500-kb) deletions included large reciprocal inversions. This implies that the frequencies of deletions and reciprocal inversions are correlated across the cohort, and both follow similar size distributions within an individual patient.Fig. 6: Structural-variant signatures in human cancers.a, The 12 most distinctive structural-variant signatures extracted by the Bayesian hierarchical Dirichlet process algorithm, run on a sample size of 2,559 genomes containing structural variants. Here the lengths of the bars represent the estimated proportion of each event class assigned to each signature (rows sum to one); the black line segments represent the 95% posterior interval for bar length from the Markov chain. FB, fold-back; mid, mid-sized. b, Association of pathogenic mutations (germline and somatic combined) in key DNA repair genes with structural-variant signatures. The sample size of patients who have pathogenic variants in the specific genes assessed is shown in brackets after each gene label (y axis). Hypothesis tests and effect sizes for each gene are derived from linear models for signature intensity after correction for histology. Significant associations from two-sided tests with correction for multiple hypothesis testing are shown. The colour and size of the points represent the estimated effect sizes. MSH refers to MSH2, MSH3, MSH4 and MSH6, genes in the mismatch repair pathway; FANC refers to genes associated with Fanconi anaemia, namely FANCA, FANCC, FANCD2, FANCE, FANCF, FANCG, FANCI, FANCL and FANCM.Full size imageWe identified five signatures of tandem duplications, split by size and replication timing. Cycles, bridges and chains of templated insertions were particularly prominent in signatures of early-replicating tandem duplications, whereas local two-jump structures were more closely associated with late-replicating tandem duplications. All of these patterns exemplify the copy-and-paste concept, in which extra copies of genomic templates are produced and inserted as an integral feature of the structural-variant process.Another signature was characterized by deletions and tandem duplications at chromosomal fragile sites35. Tandem duplications were more prominent at the edges of the fragile site, and deletions were concentrated in the centre (Extended Data Fig. 9a, b). The size range of fragile site deletions peaked at around 100 kb, similar to the larger deletion signature, whereas the rarer fragile-site tandem duplications showed no strong size peak (Extended Data Fig. 9c). Sites of fragility varied extensively across tumour types (Extended Data Fig. 9d).Unbalanced translocations comprised their own signature, which suggests that they derive from a distinct rearrangement process in cancer genomes. A further signature comprised both the fold-back inversions that are a hallmark of breakage–fusion–bridge cycles and similar structures such as translocations adjacent to fold-back inversions. Finally, there was a signature of balanced rearrangements, including reciprocal translocations and chromoplexy clusters5. This signature probably arises from several double-stranded DNA breaks (potentially occurring in interphase), in which both sides of the break are incorrectly repaired through ligation to other, simultaneously broken regions of the genome.
DNA repair genes and tumour type|We grouped annotations of pathogenic germline variants and somatic driver mutations in DNA-repair genes across the cohort8, correlating their presence with activity of the structural-variant signatures (Fig. 6b). As previously described for breast and ovarian cancers6,29, BRCA1 mutations are significantly associated with small tandem duplication signatures, the mechanistic basis of which is increasingly well understood10. As previously described6,36, CDK12 variants predicted signatures of mid-sized-to-large tandem duplications. BRCA2 variants correlated with small deletions, as expected from previous work29, and also with the reciprocal structural-variant signature that includes chromoplexy. PALB2 variants showed the same correlations with signatures of small deletions and reciprocal structural variants as does BRCA2: PALB2 colocalizes with, stabilizes and assists BRCA2 during homologous recombination37, so we might have predicted that inactivation of either gene would lead to a similar structural-variant signature. These associations between driver mutations and structural-variant signatures were consistently evident across many types of tumour (Extended Data Fig. 10).The structural-variant signatures showed considerable heterogeneity in their activity across tumour types and among patients within a given tumour type (Supplementary Fig. 8). Tumours of the gastrointestinal tract—including colorectal and oesophageal adenocarcinomas—showed high rates of the fragile-site signature. Prostate cancer was notable for the prevalence of the chromoplexy signature, as previously reported5,20, and squamous cell carcinomas of the lung were characterized by the fold-back inversion signature.We assessed how classes of structural variant altered known cancer genes (Supplementary Table 1). Some cancer genes acquire oncogenic potential only with specific structural events, such as fusion genes or enhancer hijacking. Not surprisingly, these genes typically showed little variability in which classes of structural variant could generate such events (Extended Data Fig. 11a–c)—although there were exceptions. The TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene of prostate cancer, for example, was generated by a range of processes (including simple deletions, chromoplexy and chromothripsis), all of which are prevalent signatures in this tumour type (Extended Data Fig. 11d–f).Tumour-suppressor genes and recurrently amplified genes showed more variability in which types of structural variant were observed, and these were shaped by signatures active in the relevant tumour types. For example, the tumour-suppressor genes, PTEN and RAD51B, which are commonly inactivated in breast and ovarian cancers, were often targeted by tandem duplications generating out-of-frame exon duplications (Extended Data Fig. 12a, b). By contrast, deletions were the predominant events that inactivated SMAD4 and CDKN2A, in keeping with their prevalence in cancers of the gastrointestinal tract (Extended Data Fig. 12c, d). MYC, one of the most commonly amplified genes across all types of cancer, showed considerable diversity in the mechanisms of its rearrangement: nested tandem duplications in breast cancer, translocations or chromoplexy with IGH in lymphoma, as well as chromothripsis, cycles of templated insertions, local n-jumps and local–distant clusters in other types of tumour (Extended Data Fig. 13).
Discussion|We have described the patterns and signatures of structural variation in a large cohort of uniformly analysed cancer genomes. A major grouping of patterns in structural variants that emerges from our study is one in which extra copies of genomic templates are inserted during the rearrangement process. This includes simple events such as tandem duplications, as well as a range of more-complex events with duplications and triplications that are rearranged locally as well as inserted distantly. Our signature analysis grouped a large proportion of these more-complex events together with tandem duplications, which suggests that they represent a continuum of processes that share underlying properties. A replication-based mechanism has previously been proposed to explain local two-jumps4,23,24, in which stalled replication forks or other DNA lesions cause the DNA polymerase to switch templates and continue replication in a new location. Studies in experimental models are now revealing that a wide range of mechanisms and DNA lesions can result in templated insertions: these mechanisms include tandem duplications in BRCA1 deficiency10, translocations with templated insertions caused by dysregulated strand invasion38 and distant templated insertions in the absence of replication helicases39.Genomic instability in cancer is not a single phenomenon. Instead, many different mutational processes can act to restructure the genome and, in doing so, generate a notably flexible array of possible structures. Any given tumour draws on a subset of the available processes, shaped by the cell of origin, germline predisposition and other, unknown, factors: selection then does the rest, promoting the clone that has chanced on the structure that increases its potential for self-determination.
Methods|No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.A detailed description of the methods used in this paper and many additional results are described in Supplementary Information. Here, we summarize the key aspects of the analysis.Generation of the structural-variant call setThe final set of structural variants used in this Article was generated by the Technical Working Group of the PCAWG Consortium and is described in the main PCAWG paper8. In brief, four variant callers were used to identify somatically acquired structural variants from matched tumour and germline whole genome sequencing data: SvABA (Broad pipeline), DELLY (DKFZ pipeline), BRASS (Sanger pipeline) and dRanger (Broad pipeline). These were merged into a final call set using a graph-based algorithm to identify overlapping breakpoint junctions across algorithms. Detailed visual inspection of structural-variant calls suggested that a simple approach of accepting all structural-variant calls made by two or more of the four algorithms gave the best trade-off between sensitivity and specificity.Structural-variant clustering and annotationTo identify clusters of structural variants, we developed a method for grouping structural variants into clusters and footprints to allow structural and mechanistic inferences to be made systematically. In parallel, we processed the somatic copy-number data and merged it with structural-variant junctions to enable us produce rearrangement patterns from the generated structural-variant clusters and footprints. We produced normalized representations of structural-variant cluster patterns, which enable us to tabulate the number of different cluster and footprint patterns and analyse their features. Finally, we performed manual and simulation-assisted interpretation of the recurrently observed cluster and footprint patterns. The individual steps of the structural-variant classification pipeline are outlined below and detailed in the subsequent subsections: (1) computing the exact breakpoint coordinates from clipped reads; (2) removing redundant ‘segment-bypassing’ structural variants; (3) merging rearrangement breakpoints with copy-number data to yield structural-variant breakpoint-demarcated, normalized, absolute copy-number data; (4) clustering individual structural variants into structural-variant clusters and footprints; (5) heuristically refining structural-variant clusters and footprints; (6) filtering artefactual fold-back-type structural variants with insufficient support; (7) determining balanced overlapping breakpoints (this step is to distinguish very short templated insertions from mutually overlapping balanced breakpoints); and (8) computing rearrangement patterns and categories.Distribution of structural variants across the genomeWe divided the hg19 human reference genome (autosomes and chromosome X) into 3,036,315 pixels of 1 kb, and calculated a suite of metrics per pixel to summarize a variety of genome properties with potential relevance to the distribution of rearrangements, as listed in the Supplementary Information. Properties were matched as closely as possible to the tissue of origin for cancer samples from the PCAWG data. All other genome properties were held fixed across all tissues. To test for associations between structural-variant event classes and the library of genome properties, the genome property metrics were compared between real structural-variant positions (randomly choosing one side of each breakpoint junction to reduce dependence between observations) and one million uniform random positions from the callable genome space. To compare the tissue-specific properties, each random position was assigned a random tissue type, drawing from the observed tissue-type distribution in the structural-variant call set. For each genome property and each event class, the real observations were pooled amongst the random ones, and then rank-transformed and normalized on a scale from 0 to 1. Under the null hypothesis of no event-versus-property association, the ranks of the real observations would follow a uniform distribution. We tested this in each case with a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test then applied a Benjamini–Yekutieli correction for false-discovery rate across the entire suite of tests and set the threshold for significance reporting at 0.01.Structural-variant-signature analysisWe used two algorithms for extracting structural-variant signatures. Both used the same input files, comprising a matrix of counts per patient (across all patients) of structural-variant clusters falling into a number of mutually exclusive categories. These categories included the major classes of structural variants, with the more-common events (deletions, tandem duplications and inversions) split by size and/or replication timing. The two algorithms that were  used for extracting the signatures were (1) a hierarchical Dirichlet process and (2) non-negative matrix factorization. Further details on the implementation of these algorithms are available in the Supplementary Information.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability|
Somatic and germline variant calls, mutational signatures, subclonal reconstructions, transcript abundance, splice calls and other core data generated by the ICGC/TCGA PCAWG Consortium are described in an accompanying Article8 and are available for download at https://dcc.icgc.org/releases/PCAWG. Additional information on accessing the data, including raw read files, can be found at https://docs.icgc.org/pcawg/data/. In accordance with the data access policies of the ICGC and TCGA projects, most molecular, clinical and specimen data are in an open tier that does not require access approval. To access information that could potentially identify participants, such as germline alleles and the underlying sequencing data, researchers will need to apply to the TCGA data access committee via dbGaP (https://dbgap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/aa/wga.cgi?page=login) for access to the TCGA portion of the dataset, and to the ICGC data access compliance office (http://icgc.org/daco) for the ICGC portion of the dataset. In addition, to access somatic single-nucleotide variants derived from TCGA donors, researchers will also need to obtain dbGaP authorization.

Code availability|
The core computational pipelines used by the PCAWG Consortium for alignment, quality control and variant calling are available to the public at https://dockstore.org/search?search=pcawg under the GNU General Public License v.3.0, which allows for reuse and distribution. These are described in detail in an accompanying Article8. The code for grouping structural variants into structural-variant clusters and footprints is available at https://github.com/cancerit/ClusterSV/ (version 1.0). The code for simulating rearrangements can be found at https://github.com/cancerit/SimSvGenomes (version 1.0). The code for sampling from the hierarchical Dirichlet process for identification of mutational signatures is implemented as an R package at https://github.com/nicolaroberts/hdp (version 0.1.1).

Acknowledgements|This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust, Pediatric Low-Grade Astrocytoma Fund and the Fund for Innovation in Cancer Informatics. P.J.C. is a Wellcome Trust Senior Clinical Fellow (WT088340MA). We acknowledge the contributions of the many clinical networks across ICGC and TCGA, which provided samples and data to the PCAWG Consortium, and the contributions of the Technical Working Group and the Germline Working Group of the PCAWG Consortium for the collation, realignment and harmonized variant-calling of the cancer genomes used in this study. We thank the patients and their families for their participation in the individual ICGC and TCGA projects.
Author information|Author notesA list of members and their affiliations appears at the end of the paperA list of members and their affiliations appears in the Supplementary InformationThese authors contributed equally: Yilong Li, Nicola D. Roberts, Jeremiah A. Wala, Ofer ShapiraAffiliationsCancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UKYilong Li, Nicola D. Roberts, Peter J. Campbell, Young Seok Ju, Yilong Li, Iñigo Martincorena, Nicola D. Roberts, Jorge Zamora & Peter J. CampbellTotient Inc, Cambridge, MA, USAYilong Li & Yilong LiThe Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USAJeremiah A. Wala, Ofer Shapira, Steven E. Schumacher, Kiran Kumar, Rameen Beroukhim, Andrew J. Dunford, Julian M. Hess, Kiran Kumar, Matthew Meyerson, Steven E. Schumacher, Chip Stewart, Jeremiah A. Wala, Cheng-Zhong Zhang & Rameen BeroukhimBioinformatics and Integrative Genomics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USAJeremiah A. Wala, Ofer Shapira, Steven E. Schumacher, Kiran Kumar, Rameen Beroukhim, Matthew Meyerson, Steven E. Schumacher, Jeremiah A. Wala, Cheng-Zhong Zhang & Rameen BeroukhimDepartment of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USAJeremiah A. Wala, Ofer Shapira, Steven E. Schumacher, Kiran Kumar, Rameen Beroukhim, Steven E. Schumacher, Jeremiah A. Wala & Rameen BeroukhimWeill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USAEkta Khurana & Marcin ImielinskiEuropean Molecular Biology Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg, GermanySebastian Waszak, Jan O. Korbel & Jan O. KorbelDepartment of Molecular Biology, Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USAJames E. Haber & James E. HaberNew York Genome Center, New York, NY, USAMarcin Imielinski, Marcin Imielinski & Xiaotong YaoBiotech Research & Innovation Centre (BRIC), The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkNikos Sidiropoulos, Joachim Weischenfeldt & Joachim WeischenfeldtDepartment of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKPeter J. Campbell & Peter J. CampbellUniversity of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAKadir C. Akdemir & Ken ChenDepartment of Zoology, Genetics and Physical Anthropology, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, SpainEva G. Alvarez, Bernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Jose M. C. Tubio & Jorge ZamoraCentre for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, SpainEva G. Alvarez, Bernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Jose M. C. Tubio & Jorge ZamoraThe Biomedical Research Centre (CINBIO), University of Vigo, Vigo, SpainEva G. Alvarez, Bernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Jose M. C. Tubio & Jorge ZamoraTransmissible Cancer Group, Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKAdrian Baez-OrtegaComputational Biology Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaPaul C. BoutrosDepartment of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaPaul C. BoutrosDepartment of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaPaul C. BoutrosUniversity of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USAPaul C. BoutrosPeter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDavid D. L. Bowtell, Dariush Etemadmoghadam, Dale W. Garsed & Mark ShackletonSir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDavid D. L. Bowtell & Mark ShackletonNational Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Heidelberg, Heidelberg, GermanyBenedikt Brors & Barbara HutterDivision of Applied Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyBenedikt Brors, Lars Feuerbach & Lina SieverlingGerman Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyBenedikt Brors & Barbara HutterJohns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAKathleen H. BurnsFaculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, CanadaKin ChanCentre for Molecular Science Informatics, Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKIsidro Cortés-CirianoDepartment of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAIsidro Cortés-Ciriano, Jake June-Koo Lee & Peter J. ParkLudwig Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAIsidro Cortés-Ciriano, Jake June-Koo Lee & Peter J. ParkBarcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, SpainAna Dueso-Barroso, J. Lynn Fink, Montserrat Puiggròs, David Torrents & Izar VillasanteCancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKPaul A. Edwards, Andy G. Lynch, Geoff Macintyre & Florian MarkowetzUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKPaul A. Edwards, Andy G. Lynch, Geoff Macintyre & Florian MarkowetzSidra Medicine, Doha, QatarXavier EstivillBarcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, SpainXavier EstivillQueensland Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaJ. Lynn FinkThe Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, Safed, IsraelMilana Frenkel-MorgensternDepartment of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USAMark GersteinDepartment of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USAMark GersteinProgram in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USAMark GersteinGenome Integrity and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, USADmitry A. GordeninBiomolecular Engineering Department, University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USADavid HaanMassachusetts General Hospital Center for Cancer Research, Charlestown, MA, USAJulian M. HessHeidelberg Center for Personalized Oncology (DKFZ-HIPO), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyBarbara HutterHopp Children’s Cancer Center (KiTZ), Heidelberg, GermanyDavid T. W. JonesPediatric Glioma Research Group, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyDavid T. W. JonesKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South KoreaYoung Seok JuSkolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, RussiaMarat D. KazanovA. A. Kharkevich Institute of Information Transmission Problems, Moscow, RussiaMarat D. KazanovDmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, RussiaMarat D. KazanovIntegrative Bioinformatics Support Group, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, USALeszek J. KlimczakCenter For Medical Innovation, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South KoreaYoungil KohDepartment of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South KoreaYoungil Koh & Sung-Soo YoonDivision of Genetics and Genomics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAEunjung Alice LeeBoston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USAEunjung Alice LeeSchool of Medicine/School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UKAndy G. LynchDepartment of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAAlexander Martinez-FundichelyInstitute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAAlexander Martinez-FundichelyEnglander Institute for Precision Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAAlexander Martinez-FundichelyDana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USAMatthew Meyerson & Cheng-Zhong ZhangThe Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanSatoru MiyanoRIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, JapanHidewaki NakagawaDepartment of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USAFabio C. P. NavarroUniversitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, SpainStephan OssowskiCentre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, SpainStephan OssowskiInstitute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, GermanyStephan OssowskiDepartment of Genetics and Computational Biology, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaJohn V. Pearson & Nicola WaddellInstitute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaJohn V. Pearson & Nicola WaddellGerman Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyKarsten RippeSchool of Molecular Biosciences and Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USASteven A. RobertsCancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USARalph ScullyFaculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, GermanyLina SieverlingInstitució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, SpainDavid TorrentsBen May Department for Cancer Research, Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USALixing YangTri-institutional PhD Program of Computational Biology and Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAXiaotong YaoAuthorsYilong LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarNicola D. RobertsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJeremiah A. WalaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarOfer ShapiraView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSteven E. SchumacherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarKiran KumarView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarEkta KhuranaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSebastian WaszakView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJan O. KorbelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJames E. HaberView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMarcin ImielinskiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJoachim WeischenfeldtView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarRameen BeroukhimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarPeter J. CampbellView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarConsortiaPCAWG Structural Variation Working GroupKadir C. Akdemir, Eva G. Alvarez, Adrian Baez-Ortega, Rameen Beroukhim, Paul C. Boutros, David D. L. Bowtell, Benedikt Brors, Kathleen H. Burns, Peter J. Campbell, Kin Chan, Ken Chen, Isidro Cortés-Ciriano, Ana Dueso-Barroso, Andrew J. Dunford, Paul A. Edwards, Xavier Estivill, Dariush Etemadmoghadam, Lars Feuerbach, J. Lynn Fink, Milana Frenkel-Morgenstern, Dale W. Garsed, Mark Gerstein, Dmitry A. Gordenin, David Haan, James E. Haber, Julian M. Hess, Barbara Hutter, Marcin Imielinski, David T. W. Jones, Young Seok Ju, Marat D. Kazanov, Leszek J. Klimczak, Youngil Koh, Jan O. Korbel, Kiran Kumar, Eunjung Alice Lee, Jake June-Koo Lee, Yilong Li, Andy G. Lynch, Geoff Macintyre, Florian Markowetz, Iñigo Martincorena, Alexander Martinez-Fundichely, Matthew Meyerson, Satoru Miyano, Hidewaki Nakagawa, Fabio C. P. Navarro, Stephan Ossowski, Peter J. Park, John V. Pearson, Montserrat Puiggròs, Karsten Rippe, Nicola D. Roberts, Steven A. Roberts, Bernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Steven E. Schumacher, Ralph Scully, Mark Shackleton, Nikos Sidiropoulos, Lina Sieverling, Chip Stewart, David Torrents, Jose M. C. Tubio, Izar Villasante, Nicola Waddell, Jeremiah A. Wala, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Lixing Yang, Xiaotong Yao, Sung-Soo Yoon, Jorge Zamora & Cheng-Zhong ZhangPCAWG ConsortiumContributionsY.L., N.D.R., J.A.W. and O.S. contributed equally to this manuscript, undertaking evaluation and curation of structural-variant calls, merging structural-variant call sets from four separate algorithms into a final dataset. Y.L. performed the clustering and classification of structural variants, and identified patterns of rearrangement, with assistance from N.D.R. and M.I. N.D.R. performed the analysis of structural-variant signatures with assistance from Y.L. N.D.R., J.A.W. and O.S. analysed the distribution of structural variants across the genome, with input from J.E.H., E.K., K.K. and S.E.S. S.W. and J.O.K. contributed to the analysis of how germline variants influenced signatures of structural variants. J.W., R.B. and P.J.C. jointly oversaw the project, assisted with data interpretation and wrote the paper, with input from all authors.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Joachim Weischenfeldt or Rameen Beroukhim or Peter J. Campbell.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
R.B. owns equity in Ampressa Therapeutics; M.M. is the scientific advisory board chair of—and consultant for— OrigiMed, and receives research funding from Bayer and Ono Pharma, and patent royalties from LabCorp.; J.W. is a consultant for Nference Inc.; C.-Z.Z. is a cofounder and equity holder of Pillar Biosciences, a for-profit company specializing in the development of targeted sequencing assays.

Additional information|Peer review information Nature thanks Don Conrad, Ben Lehner and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Extended data figures and tables|Extended Data Fig. 1 Per-sample counts of structural-variant breakpoint junctions by histology group.Counts of simple, classified structural variants are shown above the x axis and counts of complex breakpoint junctions below the x axis. Patients within each tumour type are ranked by frequency of simple structural variants.Extended Data Fig. 2 Further examples of templated insertion chains, cycles and bridges.Schematics follow the same structure as in Fig. 3.Extended Data Fig. 3 Number of breakpoint junctions in cycles, bridges and chains of templated insertions.a, Histogram of numbers of breakpoint junctions in templated insertion cycles, chains and bridges across all samples in all tumour types in the cohort. b, c, Two examples of particularly long cycles of templated insertions in the cohort. Examples are depicted in a similar manner to those in Fig. 3.Extended Data Fig. 4 Templated insertion events that activate TERT in hepatocellular carcinoma.a, The positions of all structural-variant breakpoints in the TERT region in the PCAWG cohort (including 50-kb flanks either side of TERT), coloured by classification and vertically spaced by the distance to the next breakpoint in the cohort. If the two sides of a breakpoint junction are contained within the plotting window, they are joined by a curved line. The number of samples with a breakpoint in the plotting window is annotated in the table in the top left. b–d, Examples of two cycles and a chain of templated insertions that affect TERT in hepatocellular carcinomas. e, Expression levels of TERT in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (n = 187 patients), separated by whether TERT was wild type, had an activating promoter point mutation, structural variants in a templated insertion or other class. Individual patient data are shown as points. The box shows the median expression level as a thick black line, with the range of the box denoting the interquartile range. The whiskers show the range of data or 1.5× the interquartile range (whichever is lower).Extended Data Fig. 5 Templated insertion events inactivating RB1 in breast and ovarian carcinomas.a, The positions of all structural-variant breakpoints in the RB1 region in the PCAWG cohort (including 50-kb flanks either side of RB1), coloured by classification and vertically spaced by the distance to the next breakpoint in the cohort. If the two sides of a breakpoint junction are contained within the plotting window, they are joined by a curved line. The number of samples with a breakpoint in the plotting window is annotated in the table in the top left. b–e, Examples of three cycles and a bridge of templated insertions that affect RB1 in breast and ovarian carcinomas.Extended Data Fig. 6 Size distribution of tandem duplications.a, Size distribution of tandem duplications per histology group. b, Samples with more than 20 tandem duplications were grouped using hierarchical clustering according to the within-patient distribution of tandem-duplication size. Seven clusters emerged, with the size distribution of up to eight randomly chosen samples per cluster illustrated. The numbers in the top right of each panel denote the number of tandem duplications in that sample.Extended Data Fig. 7 Size properties of clustered structural-variant classes.a, Comparison of the minimum and maximum templated-insert size for multi-insert cycles, chains and bridges of templated insertions. b, All events with three or more templated inserts, grouped by combination of insert sizes. c, Correlations (Pearson’s correlation coefficient) and raw sizes of individual genomic segments for reciprocal inversions and local two-jumps. Each individual event is shown as a line that links the size of the individual segments in that event. The sample sizes for each event class are shown in the labels for each panel.Extended Data Fig. 8 Relationship of an extended panel of genomic properties with structural-variant categories.Associations between a subset of the genomic properties (rows) and classes of structural variant (columns). Each density curve represents the quantile distribution of the genomic property values at observed breakpoints, compared to random genome positions. Asterisks indicate significant departures from uniform quantiles after multiple hypothesis correction by the Benjamini–Yekutieli method on a one-sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, based on a sample size of 2,559 genomes containing structural variants: *false-discovery rate < 0.01, **false-discovery rate < 0.001, ***false-discovery rate < 10−6. Cells with significant property associations are shaded by the magnitude of the shift of the median observed quantile above (blue) or below (red) 0.5. The interpretation of each property from left to right is indicated by the axes to the right of the property label.Extended Data Fig. 9 Properties of structural variants at chromosomal fragile sites.a, Structural-variant breakpoints in the most affected fragile sites: FHIT, MACROD2 and WWOX. These are coloured by classification and vertically spaced by the distance to the next breakpoint in the cohort. If the two sides of a breakpoint junction are contained within the plotting window, they are joined by a curved line. The number of samples with a breakpoint in the plotting window is annotated in the tables at the top left. b, Number of deletions and tandem duplications (top) and number of affected samples (bottom) for the 18 fragile sites considered in this analysis. c, Size distribution of deletions and tandem duplications in fragile sites (FS) compared to the rest of the genome. d, Fragile-site preference for 20 cancer histology groups as indicated by the proportion of samples that contains a deletion in each of the 18 fragile sites considered here. The number of samples is indicated in parentheses.Extended Data Fig. 10 Consistency of associations between signatures and mutations in DNA-repair genes.a, Box-and-whisker plots showing the number of structural variants attributed to the small-deletion signature in different types of tumour, split by BRCA2 status (BRCA2 wild type in orange; BRCA2 mutant in cyan). The box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a horizontal line. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is lower. Outlier patients are shown as points. There is an increase in events attributed to the small-deletion signature when BRCA2 is mutated, across multiple types of tumour (breast, pancreatic, ovarian, prostate, lung squamous and so on). b, Box-and-whisker plots as for a, showing the number of structural variants attributed to the small-deletion signature in different types of tumour, split by PALB2 status. c, Box-and-whisker plots as for a, showing the number of structural variants attributed to the early-replicating, small-tandem-duplication signature in different types of tumour, split by BRCA1 status. d, Box-and-whisker plots as for a, showing the number of structural variants attributed to the large-tandem-duplication signature in different types of tumour, split by CDK12 status.Extended Data Fig. 11 Patterns of structural variants causing fusion genes and enhancer hijacking.a, Rainfall plot of structural-variant breakpoints in the genes KIAA1549 and BRAF, commonly fused together through a tandem duplication in pilocytic astrocytomas. Structural variants are coloured by classification and arranged vertically by the distance to the next breakpoint in the cohort. If the two sides of a breakpoint junction are contained within the plotting window, they are joined by a curved line. The number of samples with a breakpoint in the plotting window is annotated in the table at the top of each panel. b, Rainfall plot of structural-variant breakpoints that affect RET, commonly fused to CCDC6 by inversion in papillary thyroid cancer. c, Rainfall plot of structural-variant breakpoints that affect BCL2, commonly hijacked to the IGH immunoglobulin locus by translocations in B cell lymphomas. d, Rainfall plot of structural-variant breakpoints that affect ERG, commonly fused with TMPRSS2 by deletion or more-complex events in prostate adenocarcinoma. e, Example of a TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene in a prostate adenocarcinoma created by a chromoplexy cycle. The estimated copy-number profile is shown as black horizontal segments, with structural variants shown as dotted arcs linking the edges of two copy-number segments. f, Example of a TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene in a prostate adenocarcinoma created by chromothripsis.Extended Data Fig. 12 Patterns of structural variants that affect selected tumour-suppressor genes.a, Rainfall plot of structural-variant breakpoints in the gene PTEN, commonly inactivated in breast and ovarian adenocarcinomas, in which tandem-duplication signatures are frequent. Structural variants are coloured by classification and arranged vertically by the distance to the next breakpoint in the cohort. If the two sides of a breakpoint junction are contained within the plotting window, they are joined by a curved line. The number of samples with a breakpoint in the plotting window is annotated in the table at the top of each panel. b, Rainfall plot of structural-variant breakpoints that affect RAD51B, commonly inactivated in breast and ovarian adenocarcinomas. c, Rainfall plot of structural-variant breakpoints that affect CDKN2A, commonly inactivated in tumours of the gastrointestinal tract, in which deletion signatures are common. d, Rainfall plot of structural-variant breakpoints that affect SMAD4, commonly inactivated in tumours of the gastrointestinal tract.Extended Data Fig. 13 Examples of structural variants increasing the copy number of MYC.The estimated copy-number profile is shown as black horizontal segments, with structural variants shown as dotted arcs linking the edges of two copy-number segments.Extended Data Table 1 Glossary of key termsFull size table
Supplementary information|
Supplementary InformationThis file contains Supplementary Figures 1-8, Supplementary Methods, Supplementary Results, References and a list of participants in ICGC/TCGA Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes Consortium.Reporting SummarySupplementary TableSupplementary Table 1: Counts of patients with SVs in different classes affecting genes in the Cancer Gene Census.
Rights and permissions|
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleLi, Y., Roberts, N.D., Wala, J.A. et al. Patterns of somatic structural variation in human cancer genomes.
                    Nature 578, 112–121 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1913-9Download citationReceived: 22 September 2017Accepted: 18 November 2019Published: 05 February 2020Issue Date: 06 February 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1913-9
Further reading|g





                  The genetics of ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas in the year 2020: dramatic progress, but far to go
                


Elizabeth D. Thompson, Nicholas J. Roberts, Laura D. Wood, James R. Eshleman, Michael G. Goggins, Scott E. Kern, Alison P. Klein & Ralph H. Hruban

Modern Pathology
                (2020)
              




                  The repertoire of mutational signatures in human cancer
                


Ludmil B. Alexandrov, Jaegil Kim, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Mi Ni Huang, Alvin Wei Tian Ng, Yang Wu, Arnoud Boot, Kyle R. Covington, Dmitry A. Gordenin, Erik N. Bergstrom, S. M. Ashiqul Islam, Nuria Lopez-Bigas, Leszek J. Klimczak, John R. McPherson, Sandro Morganella, Radhakrishnan Sabarinathan, David A. Wheeler, Ville Mustonen, Gad Getz, Steven G. Rozen & Michael R. Stratton

Nature
                (2020)
              




                  Mechanisms generating cancer genome complexity from a single cell division error
                


Neil T. Umbreit, Cheng-Zhong Zhang, Luke D. Lynch, Logan J. Blaine, Anna M. Cheng, Richard Tourdot, Lili Sun, Hannah F. Almubarak, Kim Judge, Thomas J. Mitchell, Alexander Spektor & David Pellman

Science
                (2020)
              




                  Biologically based models of cancer risk in radiation research
                


Jan Christian Kaiser, Maria Blettner & Georgios T. Stathopoulos

International Journal of Radiation Biology
                (2020)
              




                  Pan-cancer analysis of whole genomes
                


Nature
                (2020)
              




Comments|By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.
Abstract|Recent announcements indicated, without sharing any distinct published set of results, that the corticosteroid dexamethasone may reduce mortality of severe COVID-19 patients only. The recent Coronavirus [severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-CoV-2]-associated multiorgan disease, called COVID-19, has high morbidity and mortality due to autoimmune destruction of the lungs stemming from the release of a storm of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Defense against this Corona virus requires activated T cells and specific antibodies. Instead, cytokines are responsible for the serious sequelae of COVID-19 that damage the lungs. Dexamethasone is a synthetic corticosteroid approved by the FDA 1958 as a broad-spectrum immunosuppressor and it is about 30 times as active and with longer duration of action (2-3 days) than cortisone. Dexamethasone would limit the production of and damaging effect of the cytokines, but will also inhibit the protective function of T cells and block B cells from making antibodies, potentially leading to increased plasma viral load that will persist after a patient survives SARS. Moreover, dexamethasone would block macrophages from clearing secondary, nosocomial, infections. Hence, dexamethasone may be useful for the short-term in severe, intubated, COVID-19 patients, but could be outright dangerous during recovery since the virus will not only persist, but the body will be prevented from generating protective antibodies. Instead, a pulse of intravenous dexamethasone may be followed by administration of nebulized triamcinolone (6 times as active as cortisone) to concentrate in the lungs only. These corticosteroids could be given together with the natural flavonoid luteolin because of its antiviral and anti-inflammatory properties, especially its ability to inhibit mast cells, which are the main source of cytokines in the lungs. At the end, we should remember that "The good physician treats the disease; the great physician treats the patient who has the disease" [Sir William Osler's (1849-1919)].
Abstract|In immigration enforcement, many undocumented immigrants with children are often detained and deported. But it is their US-born citizen-children that have been overlooked in immigration debates and enforcement policies and practices. Citizen-children are at risk for negative psychological outcomes when families are fractured and destabilized by arrest, detention, and deportation. The children risk being torn from their parents and, often, their undocumented siblings. To add to the small but growing empirical base on the effects of living under the threat of deportation and actual deportation of parents, we compared the psychological status of three groups of citizen-children: (1) a group living in Mexico with their deported parents; (2) a group in the US with parents affected by detention or deportation; and (3) a comparison group of citizen-children whose undocumented parents were not affected by detention or deportation. We compared children on self-report and parent-report measures of behavioral adjustment, depression, anxiety, and self-concept. Across the three groups we found elevated levels of distress, and differences between children who had experienced a parent's detention or deportation and those who had not. We discuss findings in the context of children's clinical needs, future research, and implications for immigration enforcement policy and practices.
Abstract|Cancer is driven by genetic change, and the advent of massively parallel sequencing has enabled systematic documentation of this variation at the whole-genome scale1,2,3. Here we report the integrative analysis of 2,658 whole-cancer genomes and their matching normal tissues across 38 tumour types from the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) Consortium of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We describe the generation of the PCAWG resource, facilitated by international data sharing using compute clouds. On average, cancer genomes contained 4–5 driver mutations when combining coding and non-coding genomic elements; however, in around 5% of cases no drivers were identified, suggesting that cancer driver discovery is not yet complete. Chromothripsis, in which many clustered structural variants arise in a single catastrophic event, is frequently an early event in tumour evolution; in acral melanoma, for example, these events precede most somatic point mutations and affect several cancer-associated genes simultaneously. Cancers with abnormal telomere maintenance often originate from tissues with low replicative activity and show several mechanisms of preventing telomere attrition to critical levels. Common and rare germline variants affect patterns of somatic mutation, including point mutations, structural variants and somatic retrotransposition. A collection of papers from the PCAWG Consortium describes non-coding mutations that drive cancer beyond those in the TERT promoter4; identifies new signatures of mutational processes that cause base substitutions, small insertions and deletions and structural variation5,6; analyses timings and patterns of tumour evolution7; describes the diverse transcriptional consequences of somatic mutation on splicing, expression levels, fusion genes and promoter activity8,9; and evaluates a range of more-specialized features of cancer genomes8,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18.
Main|Cancer is the second most-frequent cause of death worldwide, killing more than 8 million people every year; the incidence of cancer is expected to increase by more than 50% over the coming decades19,20. ‘Cancer’ is a catch-all term used to denote a set of diseases characterized by autonomous expansion and spread of a somatic clone. To achieve this behaviour, the cancer clone must co-opt multiple cellular pathways that enable it to disregard the normal constraints on cell growth, modify the local microenvironment to favour its own proliferation, invade through tissue barriers, spread to other organs and evade immune surveillance21. No single cellular program directs these behaviours. Rather, there is a large pool of potential pathogenic abnormalities from which individual cancers draw their own combinations: the commonalities of macroscopic features across tumours belie a vastly heterogeneous landscape of cellular abnormalities.This heterogeneity arises from the stochastic nature of Darwinian evolution. There are three preconditions for Darwinian evolution: characteristics must vary within a population; this variation must be heritable from parent to offspring; and there must be competition for survival within the population. In the context of somatic cells, heritable variation arises from mutations acquired stochastically throughout life, notwithstanding additional contributions from germline and epigenetic variation. A subset of these mutations alter the cellular phenotype, and a small subset of those variants confer an advantage on clones during the competition to escape the tight physiological controls wired into somatic cells. Mutations that provide a selective advantage to the clone are termed driver mutations, as opposed to selectively neutral passenger mutations.Initial studies using massively parallel sequencing demonstrated the feasibility of identifying every somatic point mutation, copy-number change and structural variant (SV) in a given cancer1,2,3. In 2008, recognizing the opportunity that this advance in technology provided, the global cancer genomics community established the ICGC with the goal of systematically documenting the somatic mutations that drive common tumour types22.
The pan-cancer analysis of whole genomes|The expansion of whole-genome sequencing studies from individual ICGC and TCGA working groups presented the opportunity to undertake a meta-analysis of genomic features across tumour types. To achieve this, the PCAWG Consortium was established. A Technical Working Group implemented the informatics analyses by aggregating the raw sequencing data from different working groups that studied individual tumour types, aligning the sequences to the human genome and delivering a set of high-quality somatic mutation calls for downstream analysis (Extended Data Fig. 1). Given the recent meta-analysis of exome data from the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas23,24,25, scientific working groups concentrated their efforts on analyses best-informed by whole-genome sequencing data.We collected genome data from 2,834 donors (Extended Data Table 1), of which 176 were excluded after quality assurance. A further 75 had minor issues that could affect some of the analyses (grey-listed donors) and 2,583 had data of optimal quality (white-listed donors)(Supplementary Table 1). Across the 2,658 white- and grey-listed donors, whole-genome sequencing data were available from 2,605 primary tumours and 173 metastases or local recurrences. Mean read coverage was 39× for normal samples, whereas tumours had a bimodal coverage distribution with modes at 38× and 60× (Supplementary Fig. 1). RNA-sequencing data were available for 1,222 donors. The final cohort comprised 1,469 men (55%) and 1,189 women (45%), with a mean age of 56 years (range, 1–90 years) across 38 tumour types (Extended Data Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1).To identify somatic mutations, we analysed all 6,835 samples using a uniform set of algorithms for alignment, variant calling and quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Methods 2). We used three established pipelines to call somatic single-nucleotide variations (SNVs), small insertions and deletions (indels), copy-number alterations (CNAs) and SVs. Somatic retrotransposition events, mitochondrial DNA mutations and telomere lengths were also called by bespoke algorithms. RNA-sequencing data were uniformly processed to call transcriptomic alterations. Germline variants identified by the three separate pipelines included single-nucleotide polymorphisms, indels, SVs and mobile-element insertions (Supplementary Table 2).The requirement to uniformly realign and call variants on approximately 5,800 whole genomes presented considerable computational challenges, and raised ethical issues owing to the use of data from different jurisdictions (Extended Data Table 2). We used cloud computing26,27 to distribute alignment and variant calling across 13 data centres on 3 continents (Supplementary Table 3). Core pipelines were packaged into Docker containers28 as reproducible, stand-alone packages, which we have made available for download. Data repositories for raw and derived datasets, together with portals for data visualization and exploration, have also been created (Box 1 and Supplementary Table 4).Box 1 Online resources for data access, visualization and analysisThe PCAWG landing page (http://docs.icgc.org/pcawg) provides links to several data resources for interactive online browsing, analysis and download of PCAWG data and results (Supplementary Table 4).
Direct download of PCAWG data
Aligned PCAWG read data in BAM format are also available at the European Genome Phenome Archive (EGA; https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/search/site/pcawg under accession number EGAS00001001692). In addition, all open-tier PCAWG genomics data, as well as reference datasets used for analysis, can be downloaded from the ICGC Data Portal at http://docs.icgc.org/pcawg/data/. Controlled-tier genomic data, including SNVs and indels that originated from TCGA projects (in VCF format) and aligned reads (in BAM format) can be downloaded using the Score (https://www.overture.bio/) software package, which has accelerated and secure file transfer, as well as BAM slicing facilities to selectively download defined regions of genomic alignments.
PCAWG computational pipelines
The core alignment, somatic variant-calling, quality-control and variant consensus-generation pipelines used by PCAWG have each been packaged into portable cross-platform images using the Dockstore system84 and released under an Open Source licence that enables unrestricted use and redistribution. All PCAWG Dockstore images are available to the public at https://dockstore.org/organizations/PCAWG/collections/PCAWG.
ICGC Data Portal
The ICGC Data Portal85 (https://dcc.icgc.org) serves as the main entry point for accessing PCAWG datasets with a single uniform web interface and a high-performance data-download client. This uniform interface provides users with easy access to the myriad of PCAWG sequencing data and variant calls that reside in many repositories and compute clouds worldwide. Streaming technology86 provides users with high-level visualizations in real time of BAM and VCF files stored remotely on the Cancer Genome Collaboratory.
UCSC Xena
UCSC Xena87 (https://pcawg.xenahubs.net) visualizes all PCAWG primary results, including copy-number, gene-expression, gene-fusion and promoter-usage alterations, simple somatic mutations, large somatic structural variations, mutational signatures and phenotypic data. These open-access data are available through a public Xena hub, and consensus simple somatic mutations can be loaded to the local computer of a user via a private Xena hub. Kaplan–Meier plots, histograms, box plots, scatter plots and transcript-specific views offer additional visualization options and statistical analyses.
The Expression Atlas
The Expression Atlas (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/home) contains RNA-sequencing and expression microarray data for querying gene expression across tissues, cell types, developmental stages and/or experimental conditions88. Two different views of the data are provided: summarized expression levels for each tumour type and gene expression at the level of individual samples, including reference-gene expression datasets for matching normal tissues.
PCAWG Scout
PCAWG Scout (http://pcawgscout.bsc.es/) provides a framework for -omics workflow and website templating to generate on-demand, in-depth analyses of the PCAWG data that are openly available to the whole research community. Views of protected data are available that still safeguard sensitive data. Through the PCAWG Scout web interface, users can access an array of reports and visualizations that leverage on-demand bioinformatic computing infrastructure to produce results in real time, allowing users to discover trends as well as form and test hypotheses.
Chromothripsis Explorer
Chromothripsis Explorer (http://compbio.med.harvard.edu/chromothripsis/) is a portal that allows structural variation in the PCAWG dataset to be explored on an individual patient basis through the use of circos plots. Patterns of chromothripsis can also be explored in aggregated formats.
Benchmarking of genetic variant calls|To benchmark mutation calling, we ran the 3 core pipelines, together with 10 additional pipelines, on 63 representative tumour–normal genome pairs (Supplementary Note 1). For 50 of these cases, we performed validation by hybridization of tumour and matched normal DNA to a custom bait set with deep sequencing29. The 3 core somatic variant-calling pipelines had individual estimates of sensitivity of 80–90% to detect a true somatic SNV called by any of the 13 pipelines; more than 95% of SNV calls made by each of the core pipelines were genuine somatic variants (Fig. 1a). For indels—a more-challenging class of variants to identify with short-read sequencing—the 3 core algorithms had individual sensitivity estimates in the range of 40–50%, with precision of 70–95% (Fig. 1b). For individual SV algorithms, we estimated precision to be in the range 80–95% for samples in the 63-sample pilot dataset.Fig. 1: Validation of variant-calling pipelines in PCAWG.a, Scatter plot of estimated sensitivity and precision for somatic SNVs across individual algorithms assessed in the validation exercise across n = 63 PCAWG samples. Core algorithms included in the final PCAWG call set are shown in blue. b, Sensitivity and precision estimates across individual algorithms for somatic indels. c, Accuracy (precision, sensitivity and F1 score, defined as 2 × sensitivity × precision/(sensitivity + precision)) of somatic SNV calls across variant allele fractions (VAFs) for the core algorithms. The accuracy of two methods of combining variant calls (two-plus, which was used in the final dataset, and logistic regression) is also shown. d, Accuracy of indel calls across variant allele fractions.Full size imageNext, we defined a strategy to merge results from the three pipelines into one final call-set to be used for downstream scientific analyses (Methods and Supplementary Note 2). Sensitivity and precision of consensus somatic variant calls were 95% (90% confidence interval, 88–98%) and 95% (90% confidence interval, 71–99%), respectively, for SNVs (Extended Data Fig. 2). For somatic indels, sensitivity and precision were 60% (34–72%) and 91% (73–96%), respectively (Extended Data Fig. 2). Regarding somatic SVs, we estimate the sensitivity of merged calls to be 90% for true calls generated by any one pipeline; precision was estimated as 97.5%. The improvement in calling accuracy from combining different pipelines was most noticeable in variants with low variant allele fractions, which probably originate from tumour subclones (Fig. 1c, d). Germline variant calls, phased using a haplotype-reference panel, displayed a precision of more than 99% and a sensitivity of 92–98% (Supplementary Note 2).
Analysis of PCAWG data|The uniformly generated, high-quality set of variant calls across more than 2,500 donors provided the springboard for a series of scientific working groups to explore the biology of cancer. A comprehensive suite of companion papers that describe the analyses and discoveries across these thematic areas is copublished with this paper4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18 (Extended Data Table 3).
Pan-cancer burden of somatic mutations|Across the 2,583 white-listed PCAWG donors, we called 43,778,859 somatic SNVs, 410,123 somatic multinucleotide variants, 2,418,247 somatic indels, 288,416 somatic SVs, 19,166 somatic retrotransposition events and 8,185 de novo mitochondrial DNA mutations (Supplementary Table 1). There was considerable heterogeneity in the burden of somatic mutations across patients and tumour types, with a broad correlation in mutation burden among different classes of somatic variation (Extended Data Fig. 3). Analysed at a per-patient level, this correlation held, even when considering tumours with similar purity and ploidy (Supplementary Fig. 3). Why such correlation should apply on a pan-cancer basis is unclear. It is likely that age has some role, as we observe a correlation between most classes of somatic mutation and age at diagnosis (around 190 SNVs per year, P = 0.02; about 22 indels per year, P = 5 × 10−5; 1.5 SVs per year, P < 2 × 10−16; linear regression with likelihood ratio tests; Supplementary Fig. 4). Other factors are also likely to contribute to the correlations among classes of somatic mutation, as there is evidence that some DNA-repair defects can cause multiple types of somatic mutation30, and a single carcinogen can cause a range of DNA lesions31.
Panorama of driver mutations in cancer|We extracted the subset of somatic mutations in PCAWG tumours that have high confidence to be driver events on the basis of current knowledge. One challenge to pinpointing the specific driver mutations in an individual tumour is that not all point mutations in recurrently mutated cancer-associated genes are drivers32. For genomic elements significantly mutated in PCAWG data, we developed a ‘rank-and-cut’ approach to identify the probable drivers (Supplementary Methods 8.1). This approach works by ranking the observed mutations in a given genomic element based on recurrence, estimated functional consequence and expected pattern of drivers in that element. We then estimate the excess burden of somatic mutations in that genomic element above that expected for the background mutation rate, and cut the ranked mutations at this level. Mutations in each element with the highest driver ranking were then assigned as probable drivers; those below the threshold will probably have arisen through chance and were assigned as probable passengers. Improvements to features that are used to rank the mutations and the methods used to measure them will contribute to further development of the rank-and-cut approach.We also needed to account for the fact that some bona fide cancer genomic elements were not rediscovered in PCAWG data because of low statistical power. We therefore added previously known cancer-associated genes to the discovery set, creating a ‘compendium of mutational driver elements’ (Supplementary Methods 8.2). Then, using stringent rules to nominate driver point mutations that affect these genomic elements on the basis of prior knowledge33, we separated probable driver from passenger point mutations. To cover all classes of variant, we also created a compendium of known driver SVs, using analogous rules to identify which somatic CNAs and SVs are most likely to act as drivers in each tumour. For probable pathogenic germline variants, we identified all truncating germline point mutations and SVs that affect high-penetrance germline cancer-associated genes.This analysis defined a set of mutations that we could confidently assert, based on current knowledge, drove tumorigenesis in the more than 2,500 tumours of PCAWG. We found that 91% of tumours had at least one identified driver mutation, with an average of 4.6 drivers per tumour identified, showing extensive variation across cancer types (Fig. 2a). For coding point mutations, the average was 2.6 drivers per tumour, similar to numbers estimated in known cancer-associated genes in tumours in the TCGA using analogous approaches32.Fig. 2: Panorama of driver mutations in PCAWG.a, Top, putative driver mutations in PCAWG, represented as a circos plot. Each sector represents a tumour in the cohort. From the periphery to the centre of the plot the concentric rings represent: (1) the total number of driver alterations; (2) the presence of whole-genome (WG) duplication; (3) the tumour type; (4) the number of driver CNAs; (5) the number of driver genomic rearrangements; (6) driver coding point mutations; (7) driver non-coding point mutations; and (8) pathogenic germline variants. Bottom, snapshots of the panorama of driver mutations. The horizontal bar plot (left) represents the proportion of patients with different types of drivers. The dot plot (right) represents the mean number of each type of driver mutation across tumours with at least one event (the square dot) and the standard deviation (grey whiskers), based on n = 2,583 patients. b, Genomic elements targeted by different types of mutations in the cohort altered in more than 65 tumours. Both germline and somatic variants are included. Left, the heat map shows the recurrence of alterations across cancer types. The colour indicates the proportion of mutated tumours and the number indicates the absolute count of mutated tumours. Right, the proportion of each type of alteration that affects each genomic element. c, Tumour-suppressor genes with biallelic inactivation in 10 or more patients. The values included under the gene labels represent the proportions of patients who have biallelic mutations in the gene out of all patients with a somatic mutation in that gene. GR, genomic rearrangement; SCNA, somatic copy-number alteration; SGR, somatic genome rearrangement; TSG, tumour suppressor gene; UTR, untranslated region.Full size imageTo address the frequency of non-coding driver point mutations, we combined promoters and enhancers that are known targets of non-coding drivers34,35,36,37 with those newly discovered in PCAWG data; this is reported in a companion paper4. Using this approach, only 13% (785 out of 5,913) of driver point mutations were non-coding in PCAWG. Nonetheless, 25% of PCAWG tumours bear at least one putative non-coding driver point mutation, and one third (237 out of 785) affected the TERT promoter (9% of PCAWG tumours). Overall, non-coding driver point mutations are less frequent than coding driver mutations. With the exception of the TERT promoter, individual enhancers and promoters are only infrequent targets of driver mutations4.Across tumour types, SVs and point mutations have different relative contributions to tumorigenesis. Driver SVs are more prevalent in breast adenocarcinomas (6.4 ± 3.7 SVs (mean ± s.d.) compared with 2.2 ± 1.3 point mutations; P < 1 × 10−16, Mann–Whitney U-test) and ovary adenocarcinomas (5.8 ± 2.6 SVs compared with 1.9 ± 1.0 point mutations; P < 1 × 10−16), whereas driver point mutations have a larger contribution in colorectal adenocarcinomas (2.4 ± 1.4 SVs compared with 7.4 ± 7.0 point mutations; P = 4 × 10−10) and mature B cell lymphomas (2.2 ± 1.3 SVs compared with 6 ± 3.8 point mutations; P < 1 × 10−16), as previously shown38. Across tumour types, there are differences in which classes of mutation affect a given genomic element (Fig. 2b).We confirmed that many driver mutations that affect tumour-suppressor genes are two-hit inactivation events (Fig. 2c). For example, of the 954 tumours in the cohort with driver mutations in TP53, 736 (77%) had both alleles mutated, 96% of which (707 out of 736) combined a somatic point mutation that affected one allele with somatic deletion of the other allele. Overall, 17% of patients had rare germline protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in cancer-predisposition genes39, DNA-damage response genes40 and somatic driver genes. Biallelic inactivation due to somatic alteration on top of a germline PTV was observed in 4.5% of patients overall, with 81% of these affecting known cancer-predisposition genes (such as BRCA1, BRCA2 and ATM).
PCAWG tumours with no apparent drivers|Although more than 90% of PCAWG cases had identified drivers, we found none in 181 tumours (Extended Data Fig. 4a). Reasons for missing drivers have not yet been systematically evaluated in a pan-cancer cohort, and could arise from either technical or biological causes.Technical explanations could include poor-quality samples, inadequate sequencing or failures in the bioinformatic algorithms used. We assessed the quality of the samples and found that 4 of the 181 cases with no known drivers had more than 5% tumour DNA contamination in their matched normal sample (Fig. 3a). Using an algorithm designed to correct for this contamination41, we identified previously missed mutations in genes relevant to the respective cancer types. Similarly, if the fraction of tumour cells in the cancer sample is low through stromal contamination, the detection of driver mutations can be impaired. Most tumours with no known drivers had an average power to detect mutations close to 100%; however, a few had power in the 70–90% range (Fig. 3b and Extended Data Fig. 4b). Even in adequately sequenced genomes, lack of read depth at specific driver loci can impair mutation detection. For example, only around 50% of PCAWG tumours had sufficient coverage to call a mutation (≥90% power) at the two TERT promoter hotspots, probably because the high GC content of this region causes biased coverage (Fig. 3c). In fact, 6 hepatocellular carcinomas and 2 biliary cholangiocarcinomas among the 181 cases with no known drivers actually did contain TERT mutations, which were discovered after deep targeted sequencing42.Fig. 3: Analysis of patients with no detected driver mutations.a, Individual estimates of the percentage of tumour-in-normal contamination across patients with no driver mutations in PCAWG (n = 181). No data were available for myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukaemia. Points represent estimates for individual patients, and the coloured areas are estimated density distributions (violin plots). Abbreviations of the tumour types are defined in Extended Data Table 1. b, Average detection sensitivity by tumour type for tumours without known drivers (n = 181). Each dot represents a given sample and is the average sensitivity of detecting clonal substitutions across the genome, taking into account purity and ploidy. Coloured areas are estimated density distributions, shown for cohorts with at least five cases. c, Detection sensitivity for TERT promoter hotspots in tumour types in which TERT is frequently mutated. Coloured areas are estimated density distributions. d, Significant copy-number losses identified by two-sided hypothesis testing using GISTIC2.0, corrected for multiple-hypothesis testing. Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of genes in significant regions when analysing medulloblastomas without known drivers (n = 42). Significant regions with known cancer-associated genes are labelled with the representative cancer-associated gene. e, Aneuploidy in chromophobe renal cell carcinomas and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours without known drivers. Patients are ordered on the y axis by tumour type and then by presence of whole-genome duplication (bottom) or not (top).Full size imageFinally, technical reasons for missing driver mutations include failures in the bioinformatic algorithms. This affected 35 myeloproliferative neoplasms in PCAWG, in which the JAK2V617F driver mutation should have been called. Our somatic variant-calling algorithms rely on ‘panels of normals’, typically from blood samples, to remove recurrent sequencing artefacts. As 2–5% of healthy individuals carry occult haematopoietic clones43, recurrent driver mutations in these clones can enter panels of normals.With regard to biological causes, tumours may be driven by mutations in cancer-associated genes that are not yet described for that tumour type. Using driver discovery algorithms on tumours with no known drivers, no individual genes reached significance for point mutations. However, we identified a recurrent CNA that spanned SETD2 in medulloblastomas that lacked known drivers (Fig. 3d), indicating that restricting hypothesis testing to missing-driver cases can improve power if undiscovered genes are enriched in such tumours. Inactivation of SETD2 in medulloblastoma significantly decreased gene expression (P = 0.002)(Extended Data Fig. 4c). Notably, SETD2 mutations occurred exclusively in medulloblastoma group-4 tumours (P < 1 × 10−4). Group-4 medulloblastomas are known for frequent mutations in other chromatin-modifying genes44, and our results suggest that SETD2 loss of function is an additional driver that affects chromatin regulators in this subgroup.Two tumour types had a surprisingly high fraction of patients without identified driver mutations: chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (44%; 19 out of 43) and pancreatic neuroendocrine cancers (22%; 18 out of 81) (Extended Data Fig. 4a). A notable feature of the missing-driver cases in both tumour types was a remarkably consistent profile of chromosomal aneuploidy—patterns that have previously been reported45,46 (Fig. 3e). The absence of other identified driver mutations in these patients raises the possibility that certain combinations of whole-chromosome gains and losses may be sufficient to initiate a cancer in the absence of more-targeted driver events such as point mutations or fusion genes of focal CNAs.Even after accounting for technical issues and novel drivers, 5.3% of PCAWG tumours still had no identifiable driver events. In a research setting, in which we are interested in drawing conclusions about populations of patients, the consequences of technical issues that affect occasional samples will be mitigated by sample size. In a clinical setting, in which we are interested in the driver mutations in a specific patient, these issues become substantially more important. Careful and critical appraisal of the whole pipeline—including sample acquisition, genome sequencing, mapping, variant calling and driver annotation, as done here—should be required for laboratories that offer clinical sequencing of cancer genomes.
Patterns of clustered mutations and SVs|Some somatic mutational processes generate multiple mutations in a single catastrophic event, typically clustered in genomic space, leading to substantial reconfiguration of the genome. Three such processes have previously been described: (1) chromoplexy, in which repair of co-occurring double-stranded DNA breaks—typically on different chromosomes—results in shuffled chains of rearrangements47,48 (Extended Data Fig. 5a); (2) kataegis, a focal hypermutation process that leads to locally clustered nucleotide substitutions, biased towards a single DNA strand49,50,51 (Extended Data Fig. 5b); and (3) chromothripsis, in which tens to hundreds of DNA breaks occur simultaneously, clustered on one or a few chromosomes, with near-random stitching together of the resulting fragments52,53,54,55 (Extended Data Fig. 5c). We characterized the PCAWG genomes for these three processes (Fig. 4).Fig. 4: Patterns of clustered mutational processes in PCAWG.a, Kataegis. Top, prevalence of different types of kataegis and their association with SVs (≤1 kb from the focus). Bottom, the distribution of the number of foci of kataegis per sample. Chromoplexy. Prevalence of chromoplexy across cancer types, subdivided into balanced translocations and more complex events. Chromothripsis. Top, frequency of chromothripsis across cancer types. Bottom, for each cancer type a column is shown, in which each row is a chromothripsis region represented by five coloured rectangles relating to its categorization. b, Circos rainfall plot showing the distances between consecutive kataegis events across PCAWG compared with their genomic position. Lymphoid tumours (khaki, B cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; orange, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia) have hypermutation hot spots (≥3 foci with distance ≤1 kb; pale red zone), many of which are near known cancer-associated genes (red annotations) and have associated SVs (≤10 kb from the focus; shown as arcs in the centre). c, Circos rainfall plot as in b that shows the distance versus the position of consecutive chromoplexy and reciprocal translocation footprints across PCAWG. Lymphoid, prostate and thyroid cancers exhibit recurrent events (≥2 footprints with distance ≤10 kb; pale red zone) that are likely to be driver SVs and are annotated with nearby genes and associated SVs, which are shown as bold and thin arcs for chromoplexy and reciprocal translocations, respectively (colours as in a). d, Effect of chromothripsis along the genome and involvement of PCAWG driver genes. Top, number of chromothripsis-induced gains or losses (grey) and amplifications (blue) or deletions (red). Within the identified chromothripsis regions, selected recurrently rearranged (light grey), amplified (blue) and homozygously deleted (magenta)) driver genes are indicated. Bottom, inter breakpoint distance between all subsequent breakpoints within chromothripsis regions across cancer types, coloured by cancer type. Regions with an average inter breakpoint distance <10 kb are highlighted. C[T>N]T, kataegis with a pattern of thymine mutations in a Cp TpT context.Full size imageChromoplexy events and reciprocal translocations were identified in 467 (17.8%) samples (Fig. 4a, c). Chromoplexy was prominent in prostate adenocarcinoma and lymphoid malignancies, as previously described47,48, and—unexpectedly—thyroid adenocarcinoma. Different genomic loci were recurrently rearranged by chromoplexy across the three tumour types, mediated by positive selection for particular fusion genes or enhancer-hijacking events. Of 13 fusion genes or enhancer hijacking events in 48 thyroid adenocarcinomas, at least 4 (31%) were caused by chromoplexy, with a further 4 (31%) part of complexes that contained chromoplexy footprints (Extended Data Fig. 5a). These events generated fusion genes that involved RET (two cases) and NTRK3 (one case)56, and the juxtaposition of the oncogene IGF2BP3 with regulatory elements from highly expressed genes (five cases).Kataegis events were found in 60.5% of all cancers, with particularly high abundance in lung squamous cell carcinoma, bladder cancer, acral melanoma and sarcomas (Fig. 4a, b). Typically, kataegis comprises C > N mutations in a TpC context, which are probably caused by APOBEC activity49,50,51, although a T > N conversion in a TpT or CpT process (the affected T is highlighted in bold) attributed to error-prone polymerases has recently been described57. The APOBEC signature accounted for 81.7% of kataegis events and correlated positively with APOBEC3B expression levels, somatic SV burden and age at diagnosis (Supplementary Fig. 5). Furthermore, 5.7% of kataegis events involved the T > N error-prone polymerase signature and 2.3% of events, most notably in sarcomas, showed cytidine deamination in an alternative GpC or CpC context.Kataegis events were frequently associated with somatic SV breakpoints (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 6a), as previously described50,51. Deletions and complex rearrangements were most-strongly associated with kataegis, whereas tandem duplications and other simple SV classes were only infrequently associated (Supplementary Fig. 6b). Kataegis inducing predominantly T > N mutations in CpTpT context was enriched near deletions, specifically those in the 10–25-kilobase (kb) range (Supplementary Fig. 6c).Samples with extreme kataegis burden (more than 30 foci) comprise four types of focal hypermutation (Extended Data Fig. 6): (1) off-target somatic hypermutation and foci of T > N at CpTpT, found in B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma and oesophageal adenocarcinomas, respectively; (2) APOBEC kataegis associated with complex rearrangements, notably found in sarcoma and melanoma; (3) rearrangement-independent APOBEC kataegis on the lagging strand and in early-replicating regions, mainly found in bladder and head and neck cancer; and (4) a mix of the last two types. Kataegis only occasionally led to driver mutations (Supplementary Table 5).We identified chromothripsis in 587 samples (22.3%), most frequently among sarcoma, glioblastoma, lung squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma and breast adenocarcinoma18. Chromothripsis increased with whole-genome duplications in most cancer types (Extended Data Fig. 7a), as previously shown in medulloblastoma58. The most recurrently associated driver was TP5352 (pan-cancer odds ratio = 3.22; pan-cancer P = 8.3 × 10−35; q < 0.05 in breast lobular (odds ratio = 13), colorectal (odds ratio = 25), prostate (odds ratio = 2.6) and hepatocellular (odds ratio = 3.9) cancers; Fisher–Boschloo tests). In two cancer types (osteosarcoma and B cell lymphoma), women had a higher incidence of chromothripsis than men (Extended Data Fig. 7b). In prostate cancer, we observed a higher incidence of chromothripsis in patients with late-onset than early-onset disease59 (Extended Data Fig. 7c).Chromothripsis regions coincided with 3.6% of all identified drivers in PCAWG and around 7% of copy-number drivers (Fig. 4d). These proportions are considerably enriched compared to expectation if selection were not acting on these events (Extended Data Fig. 7d). The majority of coinciding driver events were amplifications (58%), followed by homozygous deletions (34%) and SVs within genes or promoter regions (8%). We frequently observed a ≥2-fold increase or decrease in expression of amplified or deleted drivers, respectively, when these loci were part of a chromothripsis event, compared with samples without chromothripsis (Extended Data Fig. 7e).Chromothripsis manifested in diverse patterns and frequencies across tumour types, which we categorized on the basis of five characteristics (Fig. 4a). In liposarcoma, for example, chromothripsis events often involved multiple chromosomes, with universal MDM2 amplification60 and co-amplification of TERT in 4 of 19 cases (Fig. 4d). By contrast, in glioblastoma the events tended to affect a smaller region on a single chromosome that was distant from the telomere, resulting in focal amplification of EGFR and MDM2 and loss of CDKN2A. Acral melanomas frequently exhibited CCND1 amplification, and lung squamous cell carcinomas SOX2 amplifications. In both cases, these drivers were more-frequently altered by chromothripsis compared with other drivers in the same cancer type and to other cancer types for the same driver (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 7f). Finally, in chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, chromothripsis nearly always affected chromosome 5 (Supplementary Fig. 7): these samples had breakpoints immediately adjacent to TERT, increasing TERT expression by 80-fold on average compared with samples without rearrangements (P = 0.0004; Mann–Whitney U-test).
Timing clustered mutations in evolution|An unanswered question for clustered mutational processes is whether they occur early or late in cancer evolution. To address this, we used molecular clocks to define broad epochs in the life history of each tumour49,61. One transition point is between clonal and subclonal mutations: clonal mutations occurred before, and subclonal mutations after, the emergence of the most-recent common ancestor. In regions with copy-number gains, molecular time can be further divided according to whether mutations preceded the copy-number gain (and were themselves duplicated) or occurred after the gain (and therefore present on only one chromosomal copy)7.Chromothripsis tended to have greater relative odds of being clonal than subclonal, suggesting that it occurs early in cancer evolution, especially in liposarcomas, prostate adenocarcinoma and squamous cell lung cancer (Fig. 5a). As previously reported, chromothripsis was especially common in melanomas62. We identified 89 separate chromothripsis events that affected 66 melanomas (61%); 47 out of 89 events affected genes known to be recurrently altered in melanoma63 (Supplementary Table 6). Involvement of a region on chromosome 11 that includes the cell-cycle regulator CCND1 occurred in 21 cases (10 out of 86 cutaneous, and 11 out of 21 acral or mucosal melanomas), typically combining chromothripsis with amplification (19 out of 21 cases)(Extended Data Fig. 8). Co-involvement of other cancer-associated genes in the same chromothripsis event was also frequent, including TERT (five cases), CDKN2A (three cases), TP53 (two cases) and MYC (two cases) (Fig. 5b). In these co-amplifications, a chromothripsis event involving multiple chromosomes initiated the process, creating a derivative chromosome in which hundreds of fragments were stitched together in a near-random order (Fig. 5b). This derivative then rearranged further, leading to massive co-amplification of the multiple target oncogenes together with regions located nearby on the derivative chromosome.Fig. 5: Timing of clustered events in PCAWG.a, Extent and timing of chromothripsis, kataegis and chromoplexy across PCAWG. Top, stacked bar charts illustrate co-occurrence of chromothripsis, kataegis and chromoplexy in the samples. Middle, relative odds of clustered events being clonal or subclonal are shown with bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Point estimates are highlighted when they do not overlap odds of 1:1. Bottom, relative odds of the events being early or late clonal are shown as above. Sample sizes (number of patients) are shown across the top. b, Three representative patients with acral melanoma and chromothripsis-induced amplification that simultaneously affects TERT and CCND1. The black points (top) represent sequence coverage from individual genomic bins, with SVs shown as coloured arcs (translocation in black, deletion in purple, duplication in brown, tail-to-tail inversion in cyan and head-to-head inversion in green). Bottom, the variant allele fractions of somatic point mutations.Full size imageIn these cases of amplified chromothripsis, we can use the inferred number of copies bearing each SNV to time the amplification process. SNVs present on the chromosome before amplification will themselves be amplified and are therefore reported in a high fraction of sequence reads (Fig. 5b and Extended Data Fig. 8). By contrast, late SNVs that occur after the amplification has concluded will be present on only one chromosome copy out of many, and thus have a low variant allele fraction. Regions of CCND1 amplification had few sometimes zero mutations at high variant allele fraction in acral melanomas, in contrast to later CCND1 amplifications in cutaneous melanomas, in which hundreds to thousands of mutations typically predated amplification (Fig. 5b and Extended Data Fig. 9a, b). Thus, both chromothripsis and the subsequent amplification generally occurred very early during the evolution of acral melanoma. By comparison, in lung squamous cell carcinomas, similar patterns of chromothripsis followed by SOX2 amplification are characterized by many amplified SNVs, suggesting a later event in the evolution of these cancers (Extended Data Fig. 9c).Notably, in cancer types in which the mutational load was sufficiently high, we could detect a larger-than-expected number of SNVs on an intermediate number of DNA copies, suggesting that they appeared during the amplification process (Supplementary Fig. 8).
Germline effects on somatic mutations|We integrated the set of 88 million germline genetic variant calls with somatic mutations in PCAWG, to study germline determinants of somatic mutation rates and patterns. First, we performed a genome-wide association study of somatic mutational processes with common germline variants (minor allele frequency (MAF) > 5%) in individuals with inferred European ancestry. An independent genome-wide association study was performed in East Asian individuals from Asian cancer genome projects. We focused on two prevalent endogenous mutational processes: spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine at CpG dinucleotides5 (signature 1) and activity of the APOBEC3 family of cytidine deaminases64 (signatures 2 and 13). No locus reached genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10−8) for signature 1 (Extended Data Fig. 10a, b). However, a locus at 22q13.1 predicted an APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis at the pan-cancer level65 (Fig. 6a). The strongest signal at 22q13.1 was driven by rs12628403, and the minor (non-reference) allele was protective against APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis (β = −0.43, P = 5.6 × 10−9, MAF = 8.2%, n = 1,201 donors)(Extended Data Fig. 10c). This variant tags a common, approximately 30-kb germline SV that deletes the APOBEC3B coding sequence and fuses the APOBEC3B 3′ untranslated region with the coding sequence of APOBEC3A. The deletion is known to increase breast cancer risk and APOBEC mutagenesis in breast cancer genomes66,67. Here, we found that rs12628403 reduces APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis specifically in cancer types with low levels of APOBEC mutagenesis (βlow = −0.50, Plow = 1 × 10−8; βhigh = 0.17, Phigh = 0.2), and increases APOBEC3A-like mutagenesis in cancer types with high levels of APOBEC mutagenesis (βhigh = 0.44, Phigh = 8 × 10−4; βlow = −0.21, Plow = 0.02). Moreover, we identified a second, novel locus at 22q13.1 that was associated with APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis across cancer types (rs2142833, β = 0.23, P = 1.3 × 10−8). We independently validated the association between both loci and APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis using East Asian individuals from Asian cancer genome projects (βrs12628403 = 0.57, Prs12628403 = 4.2 × 10−12; βrs2142833 = 0.58, Prs2142833 = 8 × 10−15) (Extended Data Fig. 10d). Notably, in a conditional analysis that accounted for rs12628403, we found that rs2142833 and rs12628403 are inherited independently in Europeans (r2<0.1), and rs2142833 remained significantly associated with APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis in Europeans (βEUR = 0.17, PEUR = 3 × 10−5) and East Asians (βASN = 0.25, PASN = 2 × 10−3) (Extended Data Fig. 10e, f). Analysis of donor-matched expression data further suggests that rs2142833 is a cis-expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) for APOBEC3B at the pan-cancer level (β = 0.19, P = 2 × 10−6)(Extended Data Fig. 10g, h), consistent with cis-eQTL studies in normal cells68,69.Fig. 6: Germline determinants of the somatic mutation landscape.a, Association between common (MAF > 5%) germline variants and somatic APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis in individuals of European ancestry (n = 1,201). Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed with PLINK v.1.9. To mitigate multiple-hypothesis testing, the significance threshold was set to genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10−8). b, Templated insertion SVs in a BRCA1-associated prostate cancer. Left, chromosome bands (1); SVs ≤ 10 megabases (Mb) (2); 1 kb read depth corrected to copy number 0–6 (3); inter- and intra chromosomal SVs > 10 Mb (4). Right, a complex somatic SV composed of a 2.2-kb tandem duplication on chromosome 2 together with a 232-base-pair (bp) inverted templated insertion SV that is derived from chromosome 5 and inserted inbetween the tandem duplication (bottom). Consensus sequence alignment of locally assembled Oxford Nanopore Technologies long sequencing reads to chromosomes 2 and 5 of the human reference genome (top). Breakpoints are circled and marked as 1 (beginning of tandem duplication), 2 (end of tandem duplication) or 3 (inverted templated insertion). For each breakpoint, the middle panel shows Illumina short reads at SV breakpoints. c, Association between rare germline PTVs (MAF < 0.5%) and somatic CpG mutagenesis (approximately with signature 1) in individuals of European ancestry (n = 1,201). Genes highlighted in blue or red were associated with lower or higher somatic mutation rates. Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed using linear-regression models with sex, age at diagnosis and cancer project as variables. To mitigate multiple-hypothesis testing, the significance threshold was set to exome-wide significance (P < 2.5 × 10−6). The black line represents the identity line that would be followed if the observed P values followed the null expectation; the shaded area shows the 95% confidence intervals. d, Catalogue of polymorphic germline L1 source elements that are active in cancer. The chromosomal map shows germline source L1 elements as volcano symbols. Each volcano is colour-coded according to the type of source L1 activity. The contribution of each source locus (expressed as a percentage) to the total number of transductions identified in PCAWG tumours is represented as a gradient of volcano size, with top contributing elements exhibiting larger sizes.Full size imageSecond, we performed a rare-variant association study (MAF <0.5%) to investigate the relationship between germline PTVs and somatic DNA rearrangements in individuals with European ancestry (Extended Data Fig. 11a–c). Germline BRCA2 and BRCA1 PTVs were associated with an increased burden of small (less than 10 kb) somatic SV deletions (P = 1 × 10−8) and tandem duplications (P = 6 × 10−13), respectively, corroborating recent studies in breast and ovarian cancer30,70. In PCAWG data, this pattern also extends to other tumour types, including adenocarcinomas of the prostate and pancreas6, typically in the setting of biallelic inactivation. In addition, tumours with high levels of small SV tandem duplications frequently exhibited a novel and distinct class of SVs termed ‘cycles of templated insertions’6. These complex SV events consist of DNA templates that are copied from across the genome, joined into one contiguous sequence and inserted into a single derivative chromosome. We found a significant association between germline BRCA1 PTVs and templated insertions at the pan-cancer level (P = 4 × 10−15)(Extended Data Fig. 11d, e). Whole-genome long-read sequencing data generated for a BRCA1-deficient PCAWG prostate tumour verified the small tandem-duplication and templated-insertion SV phenotypes (Fig. 6b). Almost all (20 out of 21) of BRCA1-associated tumours with a templated-insertion SV phenotype displayed combined germline and somatic hits in the gene. Together, these data suggest that biallelic inactivation of BRCA1 is a driver of the templated-insertion SV phenotype.Third, rare-variant association analysis revealed that patients with germline MBD4 PTVs had increased rates of somatic C > T mutation rates at CpG dinucleotides (P < 2.5 × 10−6)(Fig. 6c and Extended Data Fig. 11f, g). Analysis of previously published whole-exome sequencing samples from the TCGA (n = 8,134) replicated the association between germline MBD4 PTVs and increased somatic CpG mutagenesis at the pan-cancer level (P = 7.1 × 10−4)(Extended Data Fig. 11h). Moreover, gene-expression profiling revealed a significant but modest correlation between MBD4 expression and somatic CpG mutation rates between and within PCAWG tumour types (Extended Data Fig. 11i–k). MBD4 encodes a DNA-repair gene that removes thymidines from T:G mismatches within methylated CpG sites71, a functionality that would be consistent with a CpG mutational signature in cancer.Fourth, we assessed long interspersed nuclear elements (LINE-1; L1 hereafter) that mediate somatic retrotransposition events72,73,74. We identified 114 germline source L1 elements capable of active somatic retrotransposition, including 70 that represent insertions with respect to the human reference genome (Fig. 6d and Supplementary Table 7), and 53 that were tagged by single-nucleotide polymorphisms in strong linkage disequilibrium (Supplementary Table 7). Only 16 germline L1 elements accounted for 67% (2,440 out of 3,669) of all L1-mediated transductions10 detected in the PCAWG dataset (Extended Data Fig. 12a). These 16 hot-L1 elements followed two broad patterns of somatic activity (8 of each), which we term Strombolian and Plinian in analogy to patterns of volcanic activity. Strombolian L1s are frequently active in cancer, but mediate only small-to-modest eruptions of somatic L1 activity in cancer samples (Extended Data Fig. 12b). By contrast, Plinian L1s are more rarely seen, but display aggressive somatic activity. Whereas Strombolian elements are typically relatively common (MAF > 2%) and sometimes even fixed in the human population, all Plinian elements were infrequent (MAF ≤ 2%) in PCAWG donors (Extended Data Fig. 12c; P = 0.001, Mann–Whitney U-test). This dichotomous pattern of activity and allele frequency may reflect differences in age and selective pressures, with Plinian elements potentially inserted into the human germline more recently. PCAWG donors bear on average between 50 and 60 L1 source elements and between 5 and 7 elements with hot activity (Extended Data Fig. 12d), but only 38% (1,075 out of 2,814) of PCAWG donors carried ≥1 Plinian element. Some L1 germline source loci caused somatic loss of tumour-suppressor genes (Extended Data Fig. 12e). Many are restricted to individual continental population ancestries (Extended Data Fig. 12f–j).
Replicative immortality|One of the hallmarks of cancer is the ability of cancer to evade cellular senescence21. Normal somatic cells typically have finite cell division potential; telomere attrition is one mechanism to limit numbers of mitoses75. Cancers enlist multiple strategies to achieve replicative immortality. Overexpression of the telomerase gene, TERT, which maintains telomere lengths, is especially prevalent. This can be achieved through point mutations in the promoter that lead to de novo transcription factor binding34,37; hitching TERT to highly active regulatory elements elsewhere in the genome46,76; insertions of viral enhancers upstream of the gene77,78; and increased dosage through chromosomal amplification, as we have seen in melanoma (Fig. 5b). In addition, there is an ‘alternative lengthening of telomeres’ (ALT) pathway, in which telomeres are lengthened through homologous recombination, mediated by loss-of-function mutations in the ATRX and DAXX genes79.As reported in a companion paper13, 16% of tumours in the PCAWG dataset exhibited somatic mutations in at least one of ATRX, DAXX and TERT. TERT alterations were detected in 270 samples, whereas 128 tumours had alterations in ATRX or DAXX, of which 71 were protein-truncating. In the companion paper, which focused on describing patterns of ALT and TERT-mediated telomere maintenance13, 12 features of telomeric sequence were measured in the PCAWG cohort. These included counts of nine variants of the core hexameric sequence, the number of ectopic telomere-like insertions within the genome, the number of genomic breakpoints and telomere length as a ratio between tumour and normal. Here we used the 12 features as an overview of telomere integrity across all tumours in the PCAWG dataset.On the basis of these 12 features, tumour samples formed 4 distinct sub-clusters (Fig. 7a and Extended Data Fig. 13a), suggesting that telomere-maintenance mechanisms are more diverse than the well-established TERT and ALT dichotomy. Clusters C1 (47 tumours) and C2 (42 tumours) were enriched for traits of the ALT pathway—having longer telomeres, more genomic breakpoints, more ectopic telomere insertions and variant telomere sequence motifs (Supplementary Fig. 9). C1 and C2 were distinguished from one another by the latter having a considerable increase in the number of TTCGGG and TGAGGG variant motifs among the telomeric hexamers. Thyroid adenocarcinomas were markedly enriched among C3 samples (26 out of 33 C3 samples; P < 10−16); the C1 cluster (ALT subtype 1) was common among sarcomas; and both pancreatic endocrine neoplasms and low-grade gliomas had a high proportion of samples in the C2 cluster (ALT subtype 2) (Fig. 7b). Notably, some of the thyroid adenocarcinomas and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours that cluster together (cluster C3) had matched normal samples that also cluster together (normal cluster N3)(Extended Data Fig. 13a) and which share common properties. For example, the GTAGGG repeat was overrepresented among samples in this group (Supplementary Fig. 10).Fig. 7: Telomere sequence patterns across PCAWG.a, Scatter plot of the clusters of telomere patterns identified across PCAWG using t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-SNE), based on n = 2,518 tumour samples and their matched normal samples. Axes have arbitrary dimensions such that samples with similar telomere profiles are clustered together and samples with dissimilar telomere profiles are far apart with high probability. b, Distribution of the four tumour-specific clusters of telomere patterns in selected tumour types from PCAWG. c, Distribution of relevant driver mutations associated with alternative lengthening of telomere and normal telomere maintenance across the four clusters. d, Distribution of telomere maintenance abnormalities across tumour types with more than 40 patients in PCAWG. Samples were classified as tumour clusters 1–3 if they fell into a relevant cluster without mutations in TERT, ATRX or DAXX and had no ALT phenotype. TMM, telomere maintenance mechanisms.Full size imageSomatic driver mutations were also unevenly distributed across the four clusters (Fig. 7c). C1 tumours were enriched for RB1 mutations or SVs (P = 3 × 10−5), as well as frequent SVs that affected ATRX (P = 6 × 10−14), but not DAXX. RB1 and ATRX mutations were largely mutually exclusive (Extended Data Fig. 13b). By contrast, C2 tumours were enriched for somatic point mutations in ATRX and DAXX (P = 6 × 10−5), but not RB1. The enrichment of RB1 mutations in C1 remained significant when only leiomyosarcomas and osteosarcomas were considered, confirming that this enrichment is not merely a consequence of the different distribution of tumour types across clusters. C3 samples had frequent TERT promoter mutations (30%; P = 2 × 10−6).There was a marked predominance of RB1 mutations in C1. Nearly a third of the samples in C1 contained an RB1 alteration, which were evenly distributed across truncating SNVs, SVs and shallow deletions (Extended Data Fig. 13c). Previous research has shown that RB1 mutations are associated with long telomeres in the absence of TERT mutations and ATRX inactivation80, and studies using mouse models have shown that knockout of Rb-family proteins causes elongated telomeres81. The association with the C1 cluster here suggests that RB1 mutations can represent another route to activating the ALT pathway, which has subtly different properties of telomeric sequence compared with the inactivation of DAXX—these fall almost exclusively in cluster C2.Tumour types with the highest rates of abnormal telomere maintenance mechanisms often originate in tissues that have low endogenous replicative activity (Fig. 7d). In support of this, we found an inverse correlation between previously estimated rates of stem cell division across tissues82 and the frequency of telomere maintenance abnormalities (P = 0.01, Poisson regression)(Extended Data Fig. 13d). This suggests that restriction of telomere maintenance is an important tumour-suppression mechanism, particularly in tissues with low steady-state cellular proliferation, in which a clone must overcome this constraint to achieve replicative immortality.
Conclusions and future perspectives|The resource reported in this paper and its companion papers has yielded insights into the nature and timing of the many mutational processes that shape large- and small-scale somatic variation in the cancer genome; the patterns of selection that act on these variations; the widespread effect of somatic variants on transcription; the complementary roles of the coding and non-coding genome for both germline and somatic mutations; the ubiquity of intratumoral heterogeneity; and the distinctive evolutionary trajectory of each cancer type. Many of these insights can be obtained only from an integrated analysis of all classes of somatic mutation on a whole-genome scale, and would not be accessible with, for example, targeted exome sequencing.The promise of precision medicine is to match patients to targeted therapies using genomics. A major barrier to its evidence-based implementation is the daunting heterogeneity of cancer chronicled in these papers, from tumour type to tumour type, from patient to patient, from clone to clone and from cell to cell. Building meaningful clinical predictors from genomic data can be achieved, but will require knowledge banks comprising tens of thousands of patients with comprehensive clinical characterization83. As these sample sizes will be too large for any single funding agency, pharmaceutical company or health system, international collaboration and data sharing will be required. The next phase of ICGC, ICGC-ARGO (https://www.icgc-argo.org/), will bring the cancer genomics community together with healthcare providers, pharmaceutical companies, data science and clinical trials groups to build comprehensive knowledge banks of clinical outcome and treatment data from patients with a wide variety of cancers, matched with detailed molecular profiling.Extending the story begun by TCGA, ICGC and other cancer genomics projects, the PCAWG has brought us closer to a comprehensive narrative of the causal biological changes that drive cancer phenotypes. We must now translate this knowledge into sustainable, meaningful clinical treatments.
Methods|SamplesWe compiled an inventory of matched tumour–normal whole-cancer genomes in the ICGC Data Coordinating Centre. Most samples came from treatment-naive, primary cancers, although a small number of donors had multiple samples of primary, metastatic and/or recurrent tumours. Our inclusion criteria were: (1) matched tumour and normal specimen pair; (2) a minimal set of clinical fields; and (3) characterization of tumour and normal whole genomes using Illumina HiSeq paired-end sequencing reads.We collected genome data from 2,834 donors, representing all ICGC and TCGA donors that met these criteria at the time of the final data freeze in autumn 2014 (Extended Data Table 1). After quality assurance (Supplementary Methods 2.5), data from 176 donors were excluded as unusable, 75 had minor issues that could affect some analyses (grey-listed donors) and 2,583 had data of optimal quality (white-listed donors)(Supplementary Table 1). Across the 2,658 white- and grey-listed donors, whole-genome sequences were available from 2,605 primary tumours and 173 metastases or local recurrences. Matching normal samples were obtained from blood (2,064 donors), tissue adjacent to the primary tumour (87 donors) or from distant sites (507 donors). Whole-genome sequencing data were available for tumour and normal DNA for the entire cohort. The mean read coverage was 39× for normal samples, whereas tumours had a bimodal coverage distribution with modes at 38× and 60× (Supplementary Fig. 1). The majority of specimens (65.3%) were sequenced using 101-bp paired-end reads. An additional 28% were sequenced with 100-bp paired-end reads. Of the remaining specimens, 4.7% were sequenced with read lengths longer than 101 bp, and 1.9% with read lengths shorter than 100 bp. The distribution of read lengths by tumour cohort is shown in Supplementary Fig. 11. Median read length for whole-genome sequencing paired-end reads was 101 bp (mean = 106.2, s.d. = 16.7; minimum–maximum = 50–151). RNA-sequencing data were collected and re-analysed centrally for 1,222 donors, including 1,178 primary tumours, 67 metastases or local recurrences and 153 matched normal tissue samples adjacent to the primary tumour.Demographically, the cohort included 1,469 men (55%) and 1,189 women (45%), with a mean age of 56 years (range, 1–90 years) (Supplementary Table 1). Using population ancestry-differentiated single nucleotide polymorphisms, the ancestry distribution was heavily weighted towards donors of European descent (77% of total) followed by East Asians (16%), as expected for large contributions from European, North American and Australian projects (Supplementary Table 1).We consolidated histopathology descriptions of the tumour samples, using the ICD-0-3 tumour site controlled vocabulary89. Overall, the PCAWG dataset comprises 38 distinct tumour types (Extended Data Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1). Although the most common tumour types are included in the dataset, their distribution does not match the relative population incidences, largely owing to differences among contributing ICGC/TCGA groups in the numbers of sequenced samples.Uniform processing and somatic variant callingTo generate a consistent set of somatic mutation calls that could be used for cross-tumour analyses, we analysed all 6,835 samples using a uniform set of algorithms for alignment, variant calling and quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 2, Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Methods 2). We used the BWA-MEM algorithm90 to align each tumour and normal sample to human reference build hs37d5 (as used in the 1000 Genomes Project91). Somatic mutations were identified in the aligned data using three established pipelines, which were run independently on each tumour–normal pair. Each of the three pipelines—labelled ‘Sanger’92,93,94,95, ‘EMBL/DKFZ’96,97 and ‘Broad’98,99,100,101 after the computational biology groups that created or assembled them—consisted of multiple software packages for calling somatic SNVs, small indels, CNAs and somatic SVs (with intrachromosomal SVs defined as those >100 bp). Two additional variant algorithms102,103 were included to further improve accuracy across a broad range of clonal and subclonal mutations. We tested different merging strategies using validation data, and choses the optimal method for each variant type to generate a final consensus set of mutation calls (Supplementary Methods S2.4).Somatic retrotransposition events, including Alu and LINE-1 insertions72, L1-mediated transductions73 and pseudogene formation104, were called using a dedicated pipeline73. We removed these retrotransposition events from the somatic SV call-set. Mitochondrial DNA mutations were called using a published algorithm105. RNA-sequencing data were uniformly processed to quantify normalized gene-level expression, splicing variation and allele-specific expression, and to identify fusion transcripts, alternative promoter usage and sites of RNA editing8.Integration, phasing and validation of germline variant call-setsCalls of common (≥1% frequency in PCAWG) and rare (<1%) germline variants including single-nucleotide polymorphisms, indels, SVs and mobile-element insertions (MEIs) were generated using a population-scale genetic polymorphism-detection approach91,106. The uniform germline data-processing workflow comprised variant identification using six different variant-calling algorithms96,107,108 and was orchestrated using the Butler workflow system109.We performed call-set benchmarking, merging, variant genotyping and statistical haplotype-block phasing91 (Supplementary Methods 3.4). Using this strategy, we identified 80.1 million germline single-nucleotide polymorphisms, 5.9 million germline indels, 1.8 million multi-allelic short (<50 bp) germline variants, as well as germline SVs ≥ 50 bp in size including 29,492 biallelic deletions and 27,254 MEIs (Supplementary Table 2). We statistically phased this germline variant set using haplotypes from the 1000 Genomes Project91 as a reference panel, yielding an N50-phased block length of 265 kb based on haploid chromosomes from donor-matched tumour genomes. Precision estimates for germline SNVs and indels were >99% for the phased merged call-set, and sensitivity estimates ranged from 92% to 98%.Core alignment and variant calling by cloud computingThe requirement to uniformly realign and call variants on nearly 5,800 whole genomes (tumour plus normal) presented considerable computational challenges, and raised ethical issues owing to the use of data from different jurisdictions (Extended Data Table 2). To process the data, we adopted a cloud-computing architecture26 in which the alignment and variant calling was spread across 13 data centres on 3 continents, representing a mixture of commercial, infrastructure-as-a-service, academic cloud compute and traditional academic high-performance computer clusters (Supplementary Table 3). Together, the effort used 10 million CPU-core hours.To generate reproducible variant calling across the 13 data centres, we built the core pipelines into Docker containers28, in which the workflow description, required code and all associated dependencies were packaged together in stand-alone packages. These heavily tested, extensively validated workflows are available for download (Box 1).Validation, benchmarking and merging of somatic variant callsTo evaluate the performance of each of the mutation-calling pipelines and determine an integration strategy, we performed a large-scale deep-sequencing validation experiment (Supplementary Notes 1). We selected a pilot set of 63 representative tumour–normal pairs, on which we ran the 3 core pipelines, together with a set of 10 additional somatic variant-calling pipelines contributed by members of the PCAWG SNV Calling Methods Working Group. Sufficient DNA remained for 50 of the 63 cases for validation, which was performed by hybridization of tumour and matched normal DNA to a custom RNA bait set, followed by deep sequencing, as previously described29. Although performed using the same sequencing chemistry as the original whole-genome sequencing analyses, the considerably greater depth achieved in the validation experiment enabled accurate assessment of sensitivity and precision of variant calls. Variant calls in repeat-masked regions were not tested, owing to the challenge of designing reliable validation probes in these areas.The 3 core pipelines had individual estimates of sensitivity of 80–90% to detect a true somatic SNV called by any of the 13 pipelines; with >95% of SNV calls made by each of the core pipelines being genuine somatic variants (Fig. 1a). For indels—a more-challenging class of variants to identify in short-read sequencing data—the 3 core algorithms had individual sensitivity estimates in the range of 40–50%, with precision 70–95% (Fig. 1b). Validation of SV calls is inherently more difficult, as methods based on PCR or hybridization to RNA baits often fail to isolate DNA that spans the breakpoint. To assess the accuracy of SV calls, we therefore used the property that an SV must either generate a copy-number change or be balanced, whereas artefactual calls will not respect this property. For individual SV-calling algorithms, we estimated precision to be in the range of 80–95% for samples in the 63-sample pilot dataset.Next, we examined multiple methods for merging calls made by several algorithms into a single definitive call-set to be used for downstream analysis. The final consensus calls for SNVs were based on a simple approach that required two or more methods to agree on a call. For indels, because methods were less concordant, we used stacked logistic regression110,111 to integrate the calls. The merged SV set includes all calls made by two or more of the four primary SV-calling algorithms96,100,112,113. Consensus CNA calls were obtained by joining the outputs of six individual CNA-calling algorithms with SV consensus breakpoints to obtain base-pair resolution CNAs (Supplementary Methods 2.4.3). Consensus purity and ploidy were derived, and a multi tier system was developed for consensus copy-number calls (Supplementary Methods 2.4.3, and described in detail elsewhere7).Overall, the sensitivity and precision of the consensus somatic variant calls were 95% (90% confidence interval, 88–98%) and 95% (90% confidence interval, 71–99%), respectively, for SNVs (Extended Data Fig. 2). For somatic indels, sensitivity and precision were 60% (90% confidence interval, 34–72%) and 91% (90% confidence interval, 73–96%), respectively. Regarding SVs, we estimate the sensitivity of the merging algorithm to be 90% for true calls generated by any one calling pipeline; precision was estimated to be 97.5%. That is, 97.5% of SVs in the merged SV call-set had an associated copy-number change or balanced partner rearrangement. The improvement in calling accuracy from combining different pipelines was most noticeable in variants that had low variant allele fractions, which are likely to originate from subclonal populations of the tumour (Fig. 1c, d). There remains much work to be done to improve indel calling software; we still lack sensitivity for calling even fully clonal complex indels from short-read sequencing data.
Data availability|
The PCAWG-generated alignments, somatic variant calls, annotations and derived datasets are available for general research use for browsing and download at http://dcc.icgc.org/pcawg/ (Box 1 and Supplementary Table 4). In accordance with the data access policies of the ICGC and TCGA projects, most molecular, clinical and specimen data are in an open tier which does not require access approval. To access potentially identifying information, such as germline alleles and underlying read data, researchers will need to apply to the TCGA Data Access Committee (DAC) via dbGaP (https://dbgap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/aa/wga.cgi?page=login) for access to the TCGA portion of the dataset, and to the ICGC Data Access Compliance Office (DACO; http://icgc.org/daco) for the ICGC portion. In addition, to access somatic single nucleotide variants derived from TCGA donors, researchers will also need to obtain dbGaP authorisation.
Beyond the core sequence data and variant call-sets, the analyses in this paper used a number of datasets that were derived from the variant calls (Supplementary Table 4). The individual datasets are available at Synapse (https://www.synapse.org/), and are denoted with synXXXXX accession numbers; all these datasets are also mirrored at https://dcc.icgc.org, with full links, filenames, accession numbers and descriptions detailed in Supplementary Table 4. The datasets encompass: clinical data from each patient including demographics, tumour stage and vital status (syn10389158); harmonised tumour histopathology annotations using a standardised hierarchical ontology (syn1038916); inferred purity and ploidy values for each tumour sample (syn8272483); driver mutations for each patient from their cancer genome spanning all classes of variant, and coding versus non-coding drivers (syn11639581); mutational signatures inferred from PCAWG donors (syn11804065), including APOBEC mutagenesis (syn7437313); and transcriptional data from RNA-sequencing, including gene expression levels (syn5553985, syn5553991, syn8105922) and gene fusions (syn10003873, syn7221157).

Code availability|
Computational pipelines for calling somatic mutations are available to the public at https://dockstore.org/organizations/PCAWG/collections/PCAWG. A range of data-visualization and -exploration tools are also available for the PCAWG data (Box 1).

Acknowledgements|We thank research participants who donated samples and data, the physicians and clinical staff who contributed to sample annotation and collection, and the numerous funding agencies that contributed to the collection and analysis of this dataset.
Author information|Author notesA list of members and their affiliations appears in the online version of the paper and lists of working groups appear in the Supplementary Information.These authors jointly supervised this work: Peter J. Campbell, Gad Getz, Jan O. Korbel, Joshua M. Stuart, Lincoln D. SteinAffiliationsWellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UKPeter J. Campbell, Keiran M. Raine, Adam P. Butler, Erik Garrison, Jorge Zamora, David C. Wedge, Maxime Tarabichi, Nicola D. Roberts, Yilong Li, Ludmil B. Alexandrov, Jonathan Hinton, David R. Jones, Andrew Menzies, Lucy Stebbings, Stefan Dentro, Iñigo Martincorena, Michael R. Stratton, Peter Clapham, Jonathan Nicholson, Jon W. Teague, Federico Abascal, Young Seok Ju, Sandro Morganella, Ignacio Vázquez-García, Sancha Martin, Serena Nik-Zainal, David J. Adams, Kevin J. Dawson, Stefan C. Dentro, Henry Lee-Six, Thomas J. Mitchell, Shriram G. Bhosle, Helen Davies, Serge Dronov, Dominik Glodzik, Stian Knappskog, Sarah O’Meara, Manasa Ramakrishna, Kamna Ramakrishnan, Rebecca Shepherd, Lucy Yates, Xueqing Zou, Sam Behjati, David T. Bowen, Elli Papaemmanuil, Mohammed Ghori, Barbara Kremeyer, Daniel A. Leongamornlert & Ultan McDermottDepartment of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKPeter J. CampbellBroad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USAGad Getz, Esther Rheinbay, Gordon Saksena, Grace Tiao, Ayellet V. Segre, Kristian Cibulskis, Ignaty Leshchiner, Dimitri Livitz, Yosef E. Maruvka, Chip Stewart, Jeremiah A. Wala, Julian M. Hess, Mara Rosenberg, Andrew J. Dunford, Manaswi Gupta, Matthew Meyerson, Rameen Beroukhim, Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu, Angela N. Brooks, Steven Schumacher, Ofer Shapira, Manolis Kellis, Paz Polak, Richard Sallari, Nasa Sinnott-Armstrong, Pratiti Bandopadhayay, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Jaegil Kim, Ziao Lin, Steven E. Schumacher, Michael S. Lawrence, David Craft, John Busanovich, Kiran Kumar, Cheng-Zhong Zhang, Kirsten Kübler, Gavin Ha, Daniel Rosebrock, Oliver Spiro, Susan Bullman, Andrew D. Cherniack, Juok Cho, Carrie Cibulskis, Timothy Defreitas, Scott Frazer, Stacey B. Gabriel, Nils Gehlenborg, David I. Heiman, Eric Lander, Pei Lin, Samuel R. Meier, Michael S. Noble, Juliann Shih, Douglas Voet & Hailei ZhangCenter for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USAGad Getz & Paz PolakDepartment of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USAGad GetzHarvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAGad Getz, Esther Rheinbay, Jeremiah A. Wala, Matthew Meyerson, Rameen Beroukhim, Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu, Paz Polak, Cheng-Zhong Zhang & Kirsten KüblerEuropean Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, UKJan O. Korbel, Andy Cafferkey, Steven J. Newhouse, Lara Urban, Claudia Calabrese, Roland F. Schwarz, Alvis Brazma, Oliver Stegle, Nuno A. Fonseca, Alfonso Muñoz, Robert Petryszak, Anja Füllgrabe, Maria Keays, Irene Papatheodorou, Santiago Gonzalez, Liliana Greger, Wojciech Bazant, Elisabet Barrera, Rich Boyce, Paul Flicek, David Ocana, Charles Short, Moritz Gerstung & Ewan BirneyEuropean Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg, GermanyJan O. Korbel, Sergei Yakneen, Tobias Rausch, Sebastian M. Waszak, Nina Habermann, Lara Urban, Esa Pitkänen, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Serap Erkek, Claudia Calabrese, Benjamin Raeder, Oliver Stegle, Wolfgang Huber, Santiago Gonzalez, Vasilisa Rudneva, Vasilisa A. Rudneva, Moritz Gerstung, Lara Jerman & Stephanie SungaleeBiomolecular Engineering Department, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USAJoshua M. Stuart & David HaanAdaptive Oncology Initiative, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaJennifer L. JenningsInternational Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)/ICGC Accelerating Research in Genomic Oncology (ICGC-ARGO) Secretariat, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaJennifer L. JenningsComputational Biology Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaLincoln D. Stein, Constance H. Li, Paul C. Boutros, L. Jonathan Dursi, Jared T. Simpson, Solomon I. Shorser, Denis Yuen, Vincent Huang, Christopher Lalansingh, Takafumi N. Yamaguchi, Jüri Reimand, Fabien C. Lamaze, Philip Awadalla, Lewis Jonathan Dursi, Wei Jiao, Adam J. Wright, Shadrielle M. G. Espiritu, Christopher M. Lalansingh, Jonathan Barenboim, Keren Isaev, Marta Paczkowska, Shimin Shuai, Lina Wadi, Stephenie D. Prokopec, Fouad Yousif, Gurnit Atwal, Syed Haider, Christine P’ng, Ren X. Sun, Adriana Salcedo, Ivan Borozan, Xuemei Luo, Gavin W. Wilson, Vinayak Bhandari, Natalie S. Fox, Michael Fraser, Emilie Lalonde, Julie Livingstone, Veronica Y. Sabelnykova & Yu-Jia ShiahDepartment of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaLincoln D. Stein, Philip Awadalla, Gary D. Bader, Shimin Shuai & Gurnit AtwalDepartment of Radiation Oncology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USAMarc D. PerryGenome Informatics Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaMarc D. Perry, Hardeep K. Nahal-Bose, Christina K. Yung, Junjun Zhang, Brian D. O’Connor, George L. Mihaiescu, Vincent Ferretti, Qian Xiang, Aurélien Chateigner, Christina Yung, Brice Aminou, Niall J. Byrne, Nodirjon Fayzullaev, Kevin Thai, Nikita Desai, Morgan L. Taschuk & Timothy A. BeckDepartment of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaB. F. Francis OuelletteGenome Informatics, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaB. F. Francis OuelletteDepartment of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaConstance H. Li, Paul C. Boutros, Jüri Reimand, Keren Isaev, Michael H. A. Roehrl & Robert G. BristowMassachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USAEsther Rheinbay, G. Petur Nielsen, Dennis C. Sgroi, Chin-Lee Wu, William C. Faquin, Vikram Deshpande, David N. Louis, Yosef E. Maruvka, Mara Rosenberg, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Michael S. Lawrence, Kirsten Kübler & Michael BirrerDepartment of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaPaul C. BoutrosUniversity of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USAPaul C. BoutrosDepartment of Pathology, Department of Genomic Medicine and Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAAlexander J. LazarDepartment of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USAKatherine A. Hoadley, Piotr A. Mieczkowski, Tara J. Skelly, Donghui Tan, Umadevi Veluvolu & Matthew D. WilkersonLineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USAKatherine A. Hoadley, Grant Sanders, Saianand Balu, Tom Bodenheimer, D. Neil Hayes, Austin J. Hepperla, Alan P. Hoyle, Stuart R. Jefferys, Shaowu Meng, Lisle E. Mose, Yan Shi & Janae V. SimonsThe Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaL. Jonathan Dursi & Lewis Jonathan DursiAlvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USAMatthew H. Bailey, Li Ding, Michael D. McLellan, Robert S. Fulton & Ramaswamy GovindanThe McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University, St Louis, MO, USAMatthew H. Bailey, Li Ding, R. Jay Mashl, Kuan-lin Huang, Michael D. McLellan, Robert S. Fulton, Jiayin Wang, Michael Wendl, Michael C. Wendl, Elizabeth L. Appelbaum, Matthew G. Cordes, Catrina C. Fronick, Lucinda A. Fulton, Elaine R. Mardis, Christopher A. Miller, Heather K. Schmidt, Richard K. Wilson & Tina WongDivision of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyIvo Buchhalter, Kortine Kleinheinz, Matthias Schlesner, Roland Eils, Michael Heinold, Natalie Jäger, Nagarajan Paramasivam, Johannes Werner, Michael C. Heinold, Rolf Kabbe, Jules N. A. Kerssemakers, Manuel Prinz, Calvin Wing Yiu Chan & Carl HerrmannHeidelberg Center for Personalized Oncology (DKFZ-HIPO), German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, GermanyIvo BuchhalterInstitute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology, and BioQuant, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, GermanyIvo Buchhalter, Kortine Kleinheinz, Roland Eils, Michael Heinold, Michael C. Heinold, Daniel Hübschmann, Carl Herrmann & Umut H. ToprakBioinformatics and Omics Data Analytics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyMatthias SchlesnerDepartment of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAWenyi Wang, Yu Fan, Shaolong Cao, Yiwen Chen, Jun Li, Yumeng Wang, Yuan Yuan & Han LiangDepartment of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USADavid A. WheelerHuman Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USADavid A. Wheeler, Kyle Covington, HarshaVardhan Doddapaneni, Richard A. Gibbs, Jianhong Hu, Joy C. Jayaseelan, Viktoriya Korchina, Lora Lewis, Linghua Wang & Liu XiDepartment of Genetics and Department of Medicine, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USALi Ding, Michael D. McLellan & Robert S. FultonDepartment of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaJared T. Simpson & Yulia RubanovaUniversity of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USABrian D. O’Connor, Cameron M. Soulette, Maximillian G. Marin, Angela N. Brooks, Thomas J. Matthew & Yulia NewtonComputational Biology Program, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USAKyle Ellrott, Alex Buchanan, Adam J. Struck, Adam Margolin & Jaclyn SmithThe Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanNaoki Miyoshi, Shuto Hayashi, Seiya Imoto, Yuichi Shiraishi, Satoru Miyano, Kazuhiro Ohi, Takanori Hasegawa, Mitsuhiro Komura, Eigo Shimizu, Rui Yamaguchi & Hiroko TanakaBarcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, SpainRomina Royo, Miguel Vazquez, Mattia Bosio, Alfonso Valencia, David Torrents, Josep L. Gelpi, Ana Milovanovic, Montserrat Puiggròs, Javier Bartolome, David Vicente, J. Lynn Fink, Ana Dueso-Barroso, Izar Villasante & Javier Bartolomé RodriguezDepartment of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, NorwayMiguel VazquezCentre for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CiMUS), Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, SpainBernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Eva G. Alvarez, Alicia L. Bruzos, Javier Temes, Jorge Zamora & Jose M. C. TubioDepartment of Zoology, Genetics and Physical Anthropology, Centre for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CiMUS), Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, SpainBernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Eva G. Alvarez, Alicia L. Bruzos, Javier Temes, Jorge Zamora & Jose M. C. TubioThe Biomedical Research Centre (CINBIO), Universidade de Vigo, Vigo, SpainBernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Eva G. Alvarez, Alicia L. Bruzos, Jorge Zamora, Jose M. C. Tubio & Marta TojoDepartment of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USASuyash Shringarpure, Mark H. Wright, Carlos D. Bustamante, Francisco M. De La Vega, Nasa Sinnott-Armstrong & Suyash S. ShringarpureAnnai Systems, Carlsbad, CA, USADai-Ying Wu, Tal Shmaya & Francisco M. De La VegaCentre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, SpainGerman M. Demidov, Francesc Muyas, Oliver Drechsel, Stephan Ossowski, Xavier Estivill, Raquel Rabionet, Georgia Escaramis, Mattia Bosio, Aliaksei Z. Holik & Hana SusakInstitute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, GermanyGerman M. Demidov, Francesc Muyas & Stephan OssowskiUniversitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, SpainGerman M. Demidov, Francesc Muyas, Oliver Drechsel, Stephan Ossowski, Raquel Rabionet, Mattia Bosio, Hana Susak, Aparna Prasad, Ivo G. Gut, Miranda D. Stobbe, Sergi Beltran, Marta Gut & Simon C. HeathDepartment of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, SwitzerlandOlivier DelaneauDepartment of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, SwitzerlandOlivier DelaneauSwiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Geneva, Geneva, SwitzerlandOlivier DelaneauDepartment of Ophthalmology, Ocular Genomics Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAAyellet V. SegreDepartment of Experimental and Health Sciences, Institute of Evolutionary Biology (UPF-CSIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, SpainJosé María Heredia-GenestarDepartment of Veterinary Medicine, Transmissible Cancer Group, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKAdrian Baez-OrtegaDepartment of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South KoreaHyung-Lae KimDivision of Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USAR. Jay MashlSchool of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, ChinaKai Ye & Jiayin WangThe First Affiliated Hospital, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, ChinaKai YeIndependent Consultant, Wellesley, MA, USAAnthony DiBiaseIcahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAKuan-lin HuangBiobyte Solutions, Heidelberg, GermanyIvica LetunicDepartment of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USASushant Kumar, Mark Gerstein, Lucas Lochovsky, Shaoke Lou, Patrick D. McGillivray, Leonidas Salichos, Jonathan Warrell & Fabio C. P. NavarroProgram in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USASushant Kumar, Mark Gerstein, Jieming Chen, Arif O. Harmanci, Donghoon Lee, Shantao Li, Xiaotong Li, Lucas Lochovsky, Shaoke Lou, William Meyerson, Leonidas Salichos, Jonathan Warrell, Jing Zhang & Yan ZhangBig Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKDavid C. Wedge, Stefan Dentro & Stefan C. DentroOxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKDavid C. WedgeDepartment of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USAVenkata D. Yellapantula, Venkata Yellapantula & Ignacio Vázquez-GarcíaThe McDonnell Genome Institute at Washington University School of Medicine, and Department of Genetics and Department of Medicine, Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USAVenkata D. Yellapantula & Venkata YellapantulaDepartment of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USAMark GersteinSandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAEkta KhuranaDepartment of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAEkta Khurana, Priyanka Dhingra, Eric Minwei Liu & Alexander Martinez-FundichelyEnglander Institute for Precision Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAEkta Khurana & Alexander Martinez-FundichelyInstitute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAEkta Khurana, Priyanka Dhingra, Eric Minwei Liu & Alexander Martinez-FundichelyCNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, SpainTomas Marques-Bonet, Arcadi Navarro, Ivo G. Gut, Miranda D. Stobbe, Sergi Beltran, Marta Gut, Jean-Rémi Trotta, Justin P. Whalley & Simon C. HeathDepartment of Experimental and Health Sciences, Institute of Evolutionary Biology (UPF-CSIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, SpainTomas Marques-Bonet & Arcadi NavarroInstitució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, SpainTomas Marques-Bonet, Arcadi Navarro, Alfonso Valencia, David Torrents & Jose I. Martin-SuberoInstitut Català de Paleontologia Miquel Crusafont, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainTomas Marques-BonetDepartment of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USACarlos D. Bustamante & Francisco M. De La VegaHuman Genetics, University of Kiel, Kiel, GermanyReiner SiebertInstitute of Human Genetics, Ulm University and Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, GermanyReiner Siebert, Cristina López & Rabea WagenerRIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, JapanHidewaki Nakagawa, Keith A. Boroevich, Akihiro Fujimoto, Masashi Fujita, Mayuko Furuta, Kazuhiro Maejima, Kaoru Nakano & Aya Sasaki-OkuDepartment of Oncology, Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKDouglas F. EastonDepartment of Public Health and Primary Care, Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKDouglas F. EastonQuantitative Genomics Laboratories (qGenomics), Barcelona, SpainXavier EstivillSage Bionetworks, Seattle, WA, USALarsson OmbergDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, CanadaVincent FerrettiInstitute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona, SpainRadhakrishnan Sabarinathan, Oriol Pich, Abel Gonzalez-Perez, Carlota Rubio-Perez, David Tamborero, Loris Mularoni, Ferran Muiños, Abel Gonzalez-Perez & Iker Reyes-SalazarNational Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bangalore, IndiaRadhakrishnan SabarinathanResearch Program on Biomedical Informatics, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, SpainRadhakrishnan Sabarinathan, Oriol Pich, Abel Gonzalez-Perez, Carlota Rubio-Perez, David Tamborero, Loris Mularoni, Jordi Deu-Pons, Ferran Muiños & Abel Gonzalez-PerezBroad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USAAmaro Taylor-WeinerThe Francis Crick Institute, London, UKMatthew W. Fittall, Jonas Demeulemeester, Maxime Tarabichi, Peter Van Loo, Stefan Dentro, Matthew W Fittall, Stefan C. Dentro, Kerstin Haase & Clemency JollyUniversity of Leuven, Leuven, BelgiumJonas Demeulemeester & Peter Van LooCentre for Molecular Science Informatics, Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKIsidro Cortés-CirianoDepartment of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAIsidro Cortés-Ciriano, Peter Park, Peter J. Park & Jake June-Koo LeeLudwig Center at Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAIsidro Cortés-Ciriano, Peter Park, Peter J. Park & Jake June-Koo LeeDivision of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USABin Zhu, Lei Song, Lisa Mirabello, Xing Hua & Stephen J. ChanockGenome Integrity and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, USANatalie Saini & Dmitry A. GordeninIntegrative Bioinformatics Support Group, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, USALeszek J. KlimczakDepartment of Urology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, GermanyJoachim Weischenfeldt & Thorsten SchlommFinsen Laboratory and Biotech Research & Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkJoachim Weischenfeldt & Nikos SidiropoulosDepartment of Bioengineering and Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Moores Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USALudmil B. Alexandrov & S. M. Ashiqul IslamDepartment of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, University of Barcelona, IRSJD, IBUB, Barcelona, SpainRaquel RabionetCIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, SpainGeorgia EscaramisResearch Group on Statistics, Econometrics and Health (GRECS), UdG, Barcelona, SpainGeorgia EscaramisOxford Nanopore Technologies, New York, NY, USAEoghan Harrington & Sissel JuulApplications Department, Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, UKSimon Mayes, Daniel Turner & Daniel J. TurnerSchool of Molecular Biosciences and Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USASteven A. RobertsLaboratory of Translational Genomics, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USARoelof KosterDepartment of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandTomas J. TanskanenIntegrated Graduate Program in Physical and Engineering Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USAJieming ChenApplied Tumor Genomics Research Program, Research Programs Unit, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandLauri A. AaltonenComputational Biology Center, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USAGunnar Rätsch, André Kahles, Kjong-Van Lehmann, Natalie R. Davidson, Andre Kahles, Erik Larsson, Chris Sander, Alessandro Pastore, Yasin Senbabaoglu & Nicholas D. SocciDepartment of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandGunnar Rätsch, André Kahles & Andre KahlesDepartment of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandGunnar Rätsch, André Kahles, Kjong-Van Lehmann, Natalie R. Davidson & Andre KahlesSIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, SwitzerlandGunnar Rätsch, André Kahles, Kjong-Van Lehmann, Natalie R. Davidson, Stefan G. Stark & Andre KahlesUniversity Hospital Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandGunnar Rätsch & André KahlesWeill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USAGunnar Rätsch, Natalie R. Davidson & Bishoy M. FaltasBerlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, GermanyRoland F. Schwarz, Matthew R. Huska & Julia MarkowskiGerman Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner site Berlin, Berlin, GermanyRoland F. SchwarzGerman Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyRoland F. Schwarz, Daniel Hübschmann, Karsten Rippe & Christof von KalleBakar Computational Health Sciences Institute and Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USAAtul J. ButteDepartment of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USANilanjan ChatterjeeDepartment of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USANilanjan Chatterjee & Stephen B. BaylinDivision of Computational Genomics and Systems Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyOliver StegleDepartment of Medicine and Moores Cancer Center, Division of Biomedical Informatics, UC San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, USAOlivier HarismendyFaculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University and Tays Cancer Center, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, FinlandG. Steven Bova & Tapio VisakorpiDivision of Applied Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyLina Sieverling, Lars Feuerbach, Chen Hong, Charles David Imbusch & Benedikt BrorsFaculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, GermanyLina Sieverling, Calvin Wing Yiu Chan & Chen HongCentre for Law and Genetics, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, AustraliaDon ChalmersCentre of Genomics and Policy, McGill University and Génome Québec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Quebec, CanadaYann Joly, Bartha Knoppers, Mark Phillips, Adrian Thorogood, David Townend & Bartha M. KnoppersHeidelberg Academy of Sciences and Humanities, Heidelberg, GermanyFruzsina Molnár-GáborUC Santa Cruz Genomics Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USAMary Goldman, Brian Craft, David Haussler, Jingchun Zhu & Mary J. GoldmanCIBIO/InBIO, Research Center in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Universidade do Porto, Vairão, PortugalNuno A. FonsecaBioinformatics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, SpainElena Piñeiro-Yáñez & Fatima Al-ShahrourHoward Hughes Medical Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USADavid HausslerCancer Unit, MRC University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKJohn Weinstein, John N. Weinstein, Shona MacRae & Apurva M. HegdeDepartment of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology and Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAJohn Weinstein, John N. Weinstein, Apurva M. Hegde & Yiling LuCenter for Digital Health, Berlin Institute of Health (BIH) and Charitè–Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, GermanyMatthias BiegHeidelberg Center for Personalized Oncology (DKFZ-HIPO), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyMatthias Bieg, Barbara Hutter & Nagarajan ParamasivamDepartment of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAKen Chen & Kadir C. AkdemirDepartment of Genetics and Informatics Institute, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USAZechen ChongHeidelberg University, Heidelberg, GermanyRoland Eils, Juergen Eils & Daniel HübschmannNew BIH Digital Health Center, Berlin Institute of Health (BIH) and Charité–Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, GermanyRoland Eils, Juergen Eils & Chris LawerenzDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biomedicine, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainJosep L. GelpiDepartment of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaFaraz HachVancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaFaraz Hach, S. Cenk Sahinalp, Iman Sarrafi, Raunak Shrestha, Nilgun Donmez, Salem Malikic & Colin C. CollinsDivision of Life Science and Applied Genomics Center, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, ChinaTaobo Hu, Yogesh Kumar, Eric Z. Ma, Zhenggang Wu & Hong XueGerman Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, GermanyBarbara Hutter, Peter Lichter & Dirk SchadendorfNational Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Heidelberg, Heidelberg, GermanyBarbara Hutter, Benedikt Brors, Thorsten Zenz & Holger SültmannGenome Integration Data Center, Syntekabio, Daejon, South KoreaJongsun JungMassachusetts General Hospital Center for Cancer Research, Charlestown, MA, USAYosef E. Maruvka & Julian M. HessDepartment of Molecular Medicine (MOMA), Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, DenmarkMorten Muhlig Nielsen, Jakob Skou Pedersen, Malene Juul, Henrik Hornshøj, Johanna Bertl, Randi Istrup Juul & Tobias MadsenBioinformatics Research Centre (BiRC), Aarhus University, Aarhus, DenmarkJakob Skou Pedersen, Qianyun Guo & Asger HobolthIndiana University, Bloomington, IN, USAS. Cenk SahinalpSimon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, CanadaS. Cenk Sahinalp, Iman Sarrafi, Ermin Hodzic, Nilgun Donmez & Salem MalikicDana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USAJeremiah A. Wala, Matthew Meyerson, Angela N. Brooks, Ofer Shapira, Chris Sander, Cheng-Zhong Zhang, Levi Garraway & Andrew D. CherniackSchool of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, ChinaJiayin Wang, Yi Huang, Xuanping Zhang & Xiao XiaoDepartment of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USAMichael Wendl & Michael C. WendlDepartment of Mathematics, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USAMichael Wendl & Michael C. WendlDepartment of Biological Oceanography, Leibniz Institute of Baltic Sea Research, Rostock, GermanyJohannes WernerSeven Bridges Genomics, Charlestown, MA, USABrandi N. Davis-DusenberyUniversity of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USARobert L. Grossman, Jonathan Spring & Nishant AgrawalDepartment of Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South KoreaYoungwook KimSamsung Genome Institute, Seoul, South KoreaYoungwook KimNew York Genome Center, New York, NY, USAMarcin Imielinski & Xiaotong YaoWeill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAMarcin ImielinskiDepartment of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USARameen Beroukhim, Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu, Susan Bullman, Andrew D. Cherniack, Juliann Shih & Sabina SignorettiRigshospitalet, Copenhagen, DenmarkFrancesco FaveroDepartment of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaJeff Wintersinger & Jeffrey A. WintersingerThe Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaJeff Wintersinger, Mohamed Helmy & Jeffrey A. WintersingerVector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaJeff Wintersinger, Gurnit Atwal, Quaid D. Morris, Yulia Rubanova & Jeffrey A. WintersingerDepartment of Medical Genetics, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon, South KoreaJi Wan Park, Eun Pyo Hong & Seong Gu HeoDepartment of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandKjong-Van Lehmann, Natalie R. Davidson & Stefan G. StarkUniversity Hospital Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandKjong-Van Lehmann & Andre KahlesPeking University, Beijing, ChinaFenglin Liu, Yao He, Fan Zhang, Liangtao Zheng & Zemin ZhangSchool of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, ChinaFenglin LiuComputational and Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeDeniz Demircioğlu & Jonathan GökeSchool of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeDeniz DemircioğluBGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, ChinaSiliang Li, Dongbing Liu, Yong Hou, Chang Li, Xiaobo Li, Xinyue Li, Xingmin Liu, Qiang Pan-Hammarström, Hong Su, Jian Wang, Heng Xiong, Chen Ye, Xiuqing Zhang, Shida Zhu, Kui Wu, Huanming Yang, Shengjie Gao, Lin Li & Yong ZhouChina National GeneBank-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, ChinaSiliang Li, Dongbing Liu, Yong Hou, Chang Li, Xiaobo Li, Xingmin Liu, Hong Su, Heng Xiong, Chen Ye, Shida Zhu, Kui Wu & Henk G. StunnenbergComputational & Systems Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USAStefan G. StarkKorea University, Seoul, South KoreaStefan G. Stark & Seung Jun ShinDepartment of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USASamirkumar B. AminQuantitative & Computational Biosciences Graduate Program, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USASamirkumar B. AminThe Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USASamirkumar B. Amin, Lucas Lochovsky & Joshy GeorgeWolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Bearsden, UKPeter Bailey, Peter J. Bailey, David K. Chang, Susanna L. Cooke, Andrew V. Biankin, Fraser R. Duthie, Janet S. Graham, Nigel B. Jamieson & Elizabeth A. MusgroveThe Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, Safed, IsraelMilana Frenkel-MorgensternUniversity College London, London, UKHelena Kilpinen, Laurence B. Lovat, Jonathan D. Kay, Hayley J. Luxton, Hayley C. Whitaker & Elizabeth L. AppelbaumGenome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeTannistha Nandi & Patrick TanDepartment of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USAAkinyemi I. OjesinaHudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, USAAkinyemi I. OjesinaO’Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USAAkinyemi I. OjesinaDepartment of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SwedenQiang Pan-HammarströmCancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore, SingaporePatrick Tan & Bin Tean TehProgramme in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, SingaporePatrick Tan, Bin Tean Teh, Arnoud Boot, Mi Ni Huang, John R. McPherson, Yang Wu, Steven G. Rozen & Ioana CutcutacheSingHealth, Duke-NUS Institute of Precision Medicine, National Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore, SingaporePatrick Tan, Bin Tean Teh & Steven G. RozenInstitute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, SingaporeBin Tean TehLaboratory of Cancer Epigenome, Division of Medical Science, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeBin Tean TehDepartment of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USAChad J. CreightonNational Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeJonathan GökeBIOPIC, ICG and College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, ChinaZemin ZhangVall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, SpainCarlota Rubio-PerezDepartment of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USASteven Schumacher, Steven E. Schumacher, Aquila Fatima, Andrea L. Richardson & Andrew TuttInstitute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, SpainJordi Deu-Pons & Joan FrigolaDepartment of Mathematics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, DenmarkJohanna Bertl & Asger HobolthInstitut Hospital del Mar d’Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, SpainAbel Gonzalez-PerezOntario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaQian XiangKing Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi ArabiaSultan T. Al-SedairyDLR Project Management Agency, Bonn, GermanyAxel AretzGenome Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, CanadaCindy BellInstituto Carlos Slim de la Salud, Mexico City, MexicoMiguel BetancourtFederal Ministry of Education and Research, Berlin, GermanyChristiane BuchholzInstitut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, FranceFabien CalvoInstitut National du Cancer (INCA), Boulogne-Billancourt, FranceChristine Chomienne & Iris PauportéThe Wellcome Trust, London, UKMichael DunnProstate Cancer Canada, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaStuart EdmondsNational Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAEric Green, Carolyn M. Hutter & Heidi J. SofiaDepartment of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science & Technology, Government of India, New Delhi, Delhi, IndiaShailja Gupta & K. VijayRaghavanScience Writer, Garrett Park, MD, USAKarine JegalianCancer Research UK, London, UKNic Jones & David ScottChinese Cancer Genome Consortium, Shenzhen, ChinaYouyong LuLaboratory of Molecular Oncology, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing, ChinaYouyong Lu & Rui XingKey Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing, ChinaYouyong LuNational Cancer Center, Tokyo, JapanHitoshi NakagamaGerman Cancer Aid, Bonn, GermanyGerd Nettekoven & Laura PlankoDivision of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Tokyo, JapanTatsuhiro Shibata, Yasuhito Arai, Natsuko Hama, Fumie Hosoda, Hiromi Nakamura, Yasushi Totoki & Shinichi YachidaLaboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, JapanTatsuhiro Shibata & Tomoko UrushidateJapan Agency for Medical Research and Development, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, JapanKiyo Shimizu & Takashi YugawaMedical Oncology, University and Hospital Trust of Verona, Verona, ItalyGiampaolo Tortora, Sara Cingarlini & Michele MilellaUniversity of Verona, Verona, ItalyGiampaolo TortoraNational Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAJean C. Zenklusen, Zhining Wang, Liming Yang, Samantha J. Caesar-Johnson, John A. Demchok, Ina Felau, Roy Tarnuzzer & Jiashan ZhangCAPHRI Research School, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The NetherlandsDavid TownendLaboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, JapanKeith A. Boroevich, Todd A. Johnson, Tatsuhiko Tsunoda & Michael S. LawrenceUniversity of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USAZhaohong Chen, Michelle T. Dow, Claudiu Farcas, Antonios Koures, Lucila Ohno-Machado, Ashley Williams & Christos SotiriouPDXen Biosystems, Seoul, South KoreaSunghoon ChoElectronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, South KoreaWan Choi, Seung-Hyup Jeon, Hyunghwan Kim & Youngchoon WooChildren’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USAAllison P. HeathUniversity of Melbourne Centre for Cancer Research, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaOliver HofmannSyntekabio, Daejon, South KoreaJongwhi H. HongAbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USAThomas J. HudsonGenomics Research Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaThomas J. Hudson, Karolina Czajka, Jenna Eagles, Jeremy Johns, Faridah Mbabaali, Jessica K. Miller, Danielle Pasternack, Michelle Sam, Lee E. Timms & John D. McPhersonDepartment of Pediatric Immunology, Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital, Heidelberg, GermanyDaniel HübschmannHeidelberg Institute for Stem Cell Technology and Experimental Medicine (HI-STEM), Heidelberg, GermanyDaniel HübschmannSeven Bridges, Charlestown, MA, USASinisa Ivkovic, Milena Kovacevic, Sanja Mijalkovic, Ana Mijalkovic Mijalkovic-Lazic, Mia Nastic, Petar Radovic & Nebojsa TijanicHealth Sciences Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USAJihoon KimFunctional and Structural Genomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyMichael Koscher, Qi Wang, Marcel Kool, Andrey Korshunov & Stefan M. PfisterLeidos Biomedical Research, McLean, VA, USAJia LiuCSRA Incorporated, Fairfax, VA, USATodd D. PihlDepartment of Internal Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USAMark P. HamiltonClinical Bioinformatics, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Geneva, SwitzerlandAbdullah KahramanInstitute for Pathology and Molecular Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandAbdullah KahramanInstitute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandAbdullah Kahraman & Christian von MeringMIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USAManolis KellisInstitute of Molecular Life Sciences and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandChristian von MeringOffice of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USADaniela S. GerhardComputer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, ChinaBeifang NiuGeneplus-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, ChinaYi HuangDana-Farber/Boston Children’s Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA, USAPratiti BandopadhayayDepartment of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAPratiti BandopadhayayTechnical University of Denmark, Lyngby, DenmarkSøren Brunak & Jose M. G. IzarzugazaUniversity of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkSøren Brunak & F. Germán Rodríguez-GonzálezDepartment for BioMedical Research, University of Bern, Bern, SwitzerlandJoana Carlevaro-FitaDepartment of Medical Oncology, Inselspital, University Hospital and University of Bern, Bern, SwitzerlandJoana Carlevaro-Fita, Rory Johnson, Andrés Lanzós & Sabina SignorettiGraduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, SwitzerlandJoana Carlevaro-Fita & Andrés LanzósDepartment of Genitourinary Medical Oncology - Research, Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USADimple ChakravartyDepartment of Urology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USADimple ChakravartyKorea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South KoreaJung Kyoon Choi, Young Seok Ju & Christopher J. YoonScience for Life Laboratory, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, SwedenKlev Diamanti,  Jan Komorowski & Husen M. UmerQueensland Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaJ. Lynn Fink, Timothy J. C. Bruxner, Angelika N. Christ, Karin S. Kassahn, David K. Miller, Darrin F. Taylor, Matthew J. Anderson, Ivon Harliwong & Alan J. RobertsonUniversity of Milano Bicocca, Monza, ItalyCarlo Gambacorti-PasseriniSir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaDale W. Garsed, Mark Shackleton, David D. L. Bowtell, Dariush Etemadmoghadam, Elizabeth L. Christie, Kathryn Alsop & Linda MileshkinCenter for Precision Health, School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX, USAArif O. HarmanciHealth Data Science Unit, University Clinics, Heidelberg, GermanyCarl HerrmannDepartment for Biomedical Research, University of Bern, Bern, SwitzerlandRory Johnson, Andrés Lanzós & Mark A. RubinResearch Core Center, National Cancer Centre Korea, Goyang-si, South KoreaJong K. KimInstitute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsawa, Poland Jan KomorowskiHarvard University, Cambridge, MA, USAZiao LinMemorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USAEric Minwei Liu, Gunes Gundem, Adam Abeshouse, Hikmat Al-Ahmadie, Zachary Heins, Jason Huse, Douglas A. Levine & Angelica OchoaDepartment of Information Technology, Ghent University, Ghent, BelgiumKathleen Marchal & Sergio Pulido-TamayoDepartment of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, BelgiumKathleen Marchal, Sergio Pulido-Tamayo & Lieven P. C. VerbekeYale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USAWilliam MeyersonDivision of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South KoreaKeunchil ParkSamsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South KoreaKeunchil ParkCheonan Industry-Academic Collaboration Foundation, Sangmyung University, Cheonan, South KoreaKiejung ParkSpanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, SpainTirso PonsDepartment of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USAMatthew A. Reyna & Benjamin J. RaphaelBern Center for Precision Medicine, University Hospital of Bern, University of Bern, Bern, SwitzerlandMark A. RubinEnglander Institute for Precision Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine and New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USAMark A. RubinMeyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAMark A. RubinPathology and Laboratory, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USAMark A. RubincBio Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAChris SanderDepartment of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAChris Sander & Ciyue ShencBio Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USACiyue ShenCREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo, JapanTatsuhiko TsunodaDepartment of Medical Science Mathematics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, JapanTatsuhiko TsunodaLaboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, JapanTatsuhiko TsunodaScience for Life Laboratory, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SwedenHusen M. UmerDepartment of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, EstoniaLiis Uusküla-ReimandGenetics & Genome Biology Program, SickKids Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaLiis Uusküla-ReimandDepartment of Information Technology, Ghent University, Interuniversitair Micro-Electronica Centrum (IMEC), Ghent, BelgiumLieven P. C. VerbekeScience for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, SwedenClaes WadeliusOregon Health & Sciences University, Portland, OR, USAGuanming WuDepartment of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, ChinaJun YuThe University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USAXuanping Zhang, Leng Han & Yang YangDepartment of Biomedical Informatics, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USAYan ZhangThe Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center (OSUCCC – James), Columbus, OH, USAYan ZhangThe University of Texas School of Biomedical Informatics (SBMI) at Houston, Houston, TX, USAZhongming ZhaoDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USALihua ZouPhysics Division, Optimization and Systems Biology Lab, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USADavid CraftGenome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanHiroyuki Aburatani, Genta Nagae, Akihiro Suzuki, Kenji Tatsuno & Shogo YamamotoBioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, GermanyHans Binder, Steve Hoffmann, Stephan H. Bernhart & Peter F. StadlerInterdisciplinary Center for Bioinformatics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, GermanyHans Binder, Steve Hoffmann, Helene Kretzmer, Stephan H. Bernhart & Peter F. StadlerCenter for Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USAHuy Q. Dinh & Benjamin P. BermanComputational Biology, Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, GermanySteve HoffmannTranscriptome Bioinformatics, LIFE Research Center for Civilization Diseases, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, GermanySteve Hoffmann, Helene Kretzmer, Stephan H. Bernhart & Peter F. StadlerCenter for Epigenetics, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, USAPeter W. LairdInstitut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, SpainJose I. Martin-SuberoResearch Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, JapanGenta NagaeVan Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, USAHui Shen & Wanding ZhouCancer Epigenomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyDieter Weichenhan, Christoph Plass & Clarissa GerhauserDepartment of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USABenjamin P. BermanThe Hebrew University Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, IsraelBenjamin P. BermanGerman Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyBenedikt BrorsDepartment of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAKathleen H. Burns & Christopher UmbrichtMcKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAKathleen H. BurnsFoundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USAJohn BusanovichDepartment of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, CanadaKin ChanCancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKPaul A. Edwards, Andy G. Lynch, Geoff Macintyre, Florian Markowetz, Ke Yuan, Ruben M. Drews, Matthew Eldridge, Simon Tavaré, Steve Hawkins, Charlie E. Massie & David E. NealUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKPaul A. Edwards, Andy G. Lynch, Florian Markowetz, Thomas J. Mitchell & Anthony R. GreenBrandeis University, Waltham, MA, USAJames E. HaberHopp Children’s Cancer Center (KiTZ), Heidelberg, GermanyDavid T. W. Jones, Marcel Kool & Stefan M. PfisterPediatric Glioma Research Group, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyDavid T. W. JonesA. A. Kharkevich Institute of Information Transmission Problems, Moscow, RussiaMarat D. KazanovOncology and Immunology, Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Moscow, RussiaMarat D. KazanovSkolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, RussiaMarat D. KazanovCenter for Medical Innovation, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South KoreaYoungil KohDepartment of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South KoreaYoungil Koh & Sung-Soo YoonDivision of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAEunjung Alice LeeSchool of Medicine/School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UKAndy G. LynchDepartment of Genetics and Computational Biology, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaJohn V. Pearson, Nicola Waddell, Oliver Holmes, Stephen H. Kazakoff, Conrad R. Leonard, Felicity Newell, Katia Nones, Ann-Marie Patch, Michael C. Quinn, Scott Wood, Qinying Xu, Ken Dutton-Regester, Peter A. Johansson, Antonia L. Pritchard, Nicholas K. Hayward & Paresh VyasInstitute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaJohn V. Pearson, Nicola Waddell, Oliver Holmes, Stephen H. Kazakoff, Conrad R. Leonard, Felicity Newell, Katia Nones, Ann-Marie Patch, Michael C. Quinn, Nick M. Waddell, Scott Wood & Qinying XuCancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USARalph ScullyBen May Department for Cancer Research, Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USALixing YangTri-Institutional PhD Program in Computational Biology and Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USAXiaotong YaoDepartment of Bioengineering, and Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USAErik N. BergstromCentre for Computational Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, SingaporeArnoud Boot, Mi Ni Huang, John R. McPherson, Yang Wu, Steven G. Rozen & Ioana CutcutacheDepartment of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandVille MustonenInstitute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandVille MustonenOrganismal and Evolutionary Biology Research Programme, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandVille MustonenProgramme in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Centre for Computational Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, SingaporeAlvin Wei Tian NgDepartment of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKIgnacio Vázquez-GarcíaDepartment of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USAIgnacio Vázquez-GarcíaDuke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, SingaporeWillie YuSchool of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, ChinaTian XiaThe Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaDavid K. Chang, Andrew V. Biankin, David K. Miller, Lorraine A. Chantrill, Angela Chou, Anthony J. Gill, Amber L. Johns, James G. Kench, Adnan M. Nagrial, Marina Pajic, Ilse Rooman, Christopher J. Scarlett, Christopher W. Toon & Jianmin WuMRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC IGMM, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UKVera B. Kaiser & Colin A. SempleBioinformatics Group, Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, CroatiaRosa KarlićDepartment of Bioinformatics, Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Tokyo, JapanMamoru Kato, Hirofumi Rokutan & Mihoko Saito-AdachiUniversity of Glasgow, Glasgow, UKSancha Martin & Ke YuanAcademic Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UKSerena Nik-Zainal & Helen DaviesMRC Cancer Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKSerena Nik-Zainal, Helen Davies, Nicola Grehan, Maria O’Donovan, Rebecca C. Fitzgerald & Rehan AkbaniThe University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UKSerena Nik-ZainalMRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, UKDerek W. WrightWolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Bearsden, UKDerek W. WrightSchool of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UKKe YuanSouth Western Sydney Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Liverpool, New South Wales, AustraliaAndrew V. BiankinWest of Scotland Pancreatic Unit, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UKAndrew V. Biankin & Nigel B. JamiesonUniversity of Melbourne Centre for Cancer Research, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaSean M. GrimmondMolecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USAPavana AnurDepartment of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, AustraliaMarek CmeroThe Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, AustraliaMarek CmeroWalter + Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, Victoria, AustraliaMarek CmeroUniversity of Cologne, Cologne, GermanyYupeng Cun, Martin Peifer & Tsun-Po YangThe Edward S. Rogers Sr Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaAmit G. DeshwarUniversity of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, SloveniaLara JermanDepartment of Public Health Sciences, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USAYuan JiResearch Institute, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USAYuan JiDepartment of Statistics, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USAJuhee LeeCambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UKThomas J. Mitchell, Vincent J. Gnanapragasam, William Howat, David E. Neal, Nimish C. Shah & Anne Y. WarrenUniversity of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaQuaid D. Morris, Ruian Shi, Shankar Vembu, Fan Yang & Fei Fei LiuDepartment of Computer Science, Carleton College, Northfield, MN, USALayla OesperMolecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USAMyron PetoCenter for Psychiatric Genetics, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USASubhajit SenguptaArgmix Consulting, North Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaShankar VembuDepartment of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAKaixian YuDepartment of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USAHongtu ZhuThe University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAHongtu Zhu & Naoto T. UenoMolecular and Medical Genetics, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USAPaul T. SpellmanDepartment of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, JapanShinichi MizunoBaylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USAYumeng WangDepartment of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USAYanxun XuHeinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, GermanyMalik Alawi & Adam GrundhoffUniversity Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Bioinformatics Core, Hamburg, GermanyMalik AlawiEarlham Institute, Norwich, UKDaniel S. BrewerNorwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UKDaniel S. Brewer & Colin S. CooperThe Institute of Cancer Research, London, UKColin S. Cooper, Johann S. De Bono, Niedzica Camacho, Sandra E. Edwards, Zsofia Kote-Jarai, Daniel A. Leongamornlert, Lucy Matthews, Sue Merson & Rosalind A. EelesUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, UKColin S. CooperGerman Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Hamburg-Borstel-Lübeck-Riems, Hamburg, GermanyAdam GrundhoffDivision of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyMurat Iskar, Marc Zapatka, Peter Lichter, Bernhard Radlwimmer & Volker HovestadtDepartment of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAXiaoping Su, Kenneth Aldape, Russell R. Broaddus, Bogdan Czerniak & Adel El-NaggarVictorian Institute of Forensic Medicine, Southbank, Victoria, AustraliaStephen M. CordnerPeter MacCallum Cancer Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaPrue A. Cowin, Sian Fereday, Anne Hamilton, Gisela Mir Arnau, Chris Mitchell, Heather Thorne, Nadia Traficante & Ravikiran VedururuUniversity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USARonny DrapkinCentre for Cancer Research, The Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaJillian A. HungDepartment of Gynaecological Oncology, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaJillian A. HungGenetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, AustraliaKarin S. KassahnCentre for Cancer Research, The Westmead Institute for Medical Research, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaCatherine J. KennedyDepartment of Gynaecological Oncology, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaCatherine J. KennedyGarvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, AustraliaDavid K. Miller & Amber L. JohnsDepartment of Clinical Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaPaul M. Waring, Karin A. Oien, Stefano Serra, Roberto Salgado, Marc J. van de Vijver, Chawalit Pairojkul & Carl MorrisonCentre for Cancer Research, The Westmead Institute for Medical Research, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaAnna deFazio, Yoke-Eng Chiew, Varsha Tembe & Graham J. MannDepartment of Gynaecological Oncology, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaAnna deFazio & Richard A. ScolyerWestmead Clinical School, The Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaAnna deFazioDepartment of Surgery, Pancreas Institute, University and Hospital Trust of Verona, Verona, ItalyDavide Antonello, Claudio Bassi, Luca Landoni, Neil D. Merrett, Marco Miotto, Jaswinder S. Samra, Elisabetta Sereni, Giuseppe Malleo, Giovanni Marchegiani, Salvatore Paiella, Antonio Pea, Paolo Pederzoli, Andrea Ruzzenente, Roberto Salvia, Narong Khuntikeo, Jeffrey Marks & Samuel SingerDepartment of Surgery, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaAndrew P. BarbourSurgical Oncology Group, Diamantina Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaAndrew P. BarbourDepartment of Diagnostics and Public Health, University and Hospital Trust of Verona, Verona, ItalySamantha Bersani, Ivana Cataldo, Maria Scardoni & Claudio LuchiniARC-Net Centre for Applied Research on Cancer, University and Hospital Trust of Verona, Verona, ItalyIvana Cataldo, Vincenzo Corbo, Rita T. Lawlor, Andrea Mafficini, Borislav C. Rusev, Aldo Scarpa, Katarzyna O. Sikora, Caterina Vicentini, Alain Viari, Giada Bonizzato, Cinzia Cantù, Sonia Grimaldi & Nicola SperandioIllawarra Shoalhaven Local Health District L3 Illawarra Cancer Care Centre, Wollongong Hospital, Wollongong, New South Wales, AustraliaLorraine A. ChantrillDepartment of Pathology, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaAngela Chou, Anthony J. Gill, James G. Kench & Jaswinder S. SamraSchool of Biological Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New ZealandNicole CloonanDepartment of Pathology and Diagnostics, University and Hospital Trust of Verona, Verona, ItalyVincenzo Corbo, Michele Simbolo & Stefano BarbiDepartment of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, University and Hospital Trust of Verona, Verona, ItalyMaria Vittoria DaviDepartment of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, UKFraser R. DuthieDepartment of Medical Oncology, Beatson West of Scotland Cancer Centre, Glasgow, UKJanet S. GrahamAcademic Unit of Surgery, School of Medicine, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UKNigel B. JamiesonTissue Pathology and Diagnostic Oncology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, New South Wales, AustraliaJames G. KenchDiscipline of Surgery, Western Sydney University, Penrith, New South Wales, AustraliaNeil D. MerrettInstitute of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UKKarin A. OienThe Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaMark PineseSchool of Environmental and Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, The University of Newcastle, Ourimbah, New South Wales, AustraliaChristopher J. ScarlettEastern Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaNikolajs ZepsEpworth HealthCare, Richmond, Victoria, AustraliaNikolajs ZepsOlivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute, La Trobe University, Heidelberg, Victoria, AustraliaAndreas Behren & Jonathan CebonMelanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Wollstonecraft, New South Wales, AustraliaHazel Burke, Peter Hersey, Valerie Jakrot & Nicholas K. HaywardChildren’s Hospital at Westmead, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaRebecca A. DaggMelanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaRicardo De Paoli-Iseppi & Hojabr KakavandAustralian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University, Douglas, Queensland, AustraliaMatthew A. FieldBioplatforms Australia, North Ryde, New South Wales, AustraliaAnna Fitzgerald & Catherine A. ShangMelanoma Institute Australia, Macquarie University, Wollstonecraft, New South Wales, AustraliaRichard F. KeffordChildren’s Medical Research Institute, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaLoretta M. S. Lau & Hilda A. PickettMelanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Wollstonecraft, New South Wales, AustraliaGeorgina V. Long, Robyn P. M. Saw, Ping Shang, Andrew J. Spillane, Jonathan R. Stretch, John F. Thompson, James S. Wilmott & Richard A. ScolyerCentre for Cancer Research, The Westmead Millennium Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaGulietta M. PupoTranslational Cancer Research Centre, The University of Sydney at the Westmead Institute, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaSarah-Jane Schramm & Varsha TembeDiscipline of Pathology, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaRicardo E. Vilain & Richard A. ScolyerSchool of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaJean Y. YangMelanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Wollstonecraft, New South Wales, AustraliaGraham J. MannRoyal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, AustraliaRichard A. ScolyerDiagnostic Development, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaJohn BartlettOntario Tumour Bank, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaJohn Bartlett & Monique AlbertPanCuRx Translational Research Initiative, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaPrashant Bavi, Michelle Chan-Seng-Yue, Sean Cleary, Robert E. Denroche, Steven Gallinger, Robert C. Grant, Gun Ho Jang, Sangeetha Kalimuthu, Ilinca Lungu, Faiyaz Notta, Michael H. A. Roehrl, Gavin W. Wilson, Julie M. Wilson & John D. McPhersonBioSpecimen Sciences Program, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDianne E. ChadwickHepatobiliary/Pancreatic Surgical Oncology Program, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaSean Cleary, Ashton A. Connor & Steven GallingerLunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaAshton A. Connor, Steven Gallinger, Robert C. Grant, Treasa A. McPherson & Iris SelanderDivision of Medical Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaNeesha C. Dhani, David Hedley & Malcolm J. MooreUniversity of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USAMichael A. Hollingsworth & Sarah P. ThayerBioSpecimen Sciences Program, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaSheng-Ben Liang & Sagedeh ShahabiTransformative Pathology, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaIlinca LunguUniversity Health Network, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaFaiyaz NottaDepartment of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USAGloria M. PetersenBioSpecimen Sciences, Laboratory Medicine (Toronto), Medical Biophysics, PanCuRX, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaMichael H. A. RoehrlDepartment of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaMichael H. A. RoehrlDepartment of Pathology, Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USAMichael H. A. RoehrlDepartment of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaBradly G. WoutersDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University California at Davis, Sacramento, CA, USAJohn D. McPhersonHuman Longevity, San Diego, CA, USATimothy A. BeckDepartment of Surgical Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaNeil E. FleshnerGenome Informatics Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaLawrence E. HeislerSTTARR Innovation Facility, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaAlice MengDepartment of Pathology, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaTheodorus Van der KwastCRUK Manchester Institute and Centre, Manchester, UKRobert G. BristowDepartment of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaRobert G. BristowManchester Cancer Research Centre, Cancer Division, FBMH, University of Manchester, Manchester, UKRobert G. BristowRadiation Medicine Program, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaRobert G. BristowHefei University of Technology, Anhui, ChinaShuai Ding & Shanlin YangState Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Fourth Military Medical University, Shaanxi, ChinaDaiming Fan & Yongzhan NieFourth Military Medical University, Shaanxi, ChinaYongzhan NieLaboratory of Molecular Oncology, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing, ChinaRui XingDepartment of Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, ChinaYingyan YuLeeds Institute of Medical Research, University of Leeds, St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, UKRosamonde E. Banks & Naveen VasudevCanadian Center for Computational Genomics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, CanadaGuillaume BourqueDepartment of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, CanadaGuillaume Bourque, Yasser Riazalhosseini & Mark LathropInternational Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, FrancePaul Brennan & Ghislaine SceloMcGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Quebec, CanadaLouis LetourneauSt James Institute of Oncology, University of Leeds, St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, UKNaveen VasudevInstitute of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Latvia, Riga, LatviaJuris ViksnaCentre National de Génotypage, CEA - Institute de Génomique, Evry, FranceJörg TostDepartment of Oncology, Gil Medical Center, Gachon University, Incheon, South KoreaSung-Min AhnDepartment of Molecular Oncology, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaSamuel AparicioLos Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USALaurent ArnouldDepartment of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, NorwayM. R. Aure, Anne-Lise Børresen-Dale & Anita LangerødLund University, Lund, SwedenAke Borg & Markus RingnérTranslational Research Lab, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, FranceSandrine BoyaultDepartment of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The NetherlandsArie B. BrinkmanDepartment of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAJane E. BrockDepartment of Molecular Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The NetherlandsAnnegien BroeksLi Ka Shing Centre, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKCarlos Caldas & Suet-Feung ChinDepartment of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKCarlos Caldas & Suet-Feung ChinBreast Cancer Translational Research Laboratory J. C. Heuson, Institut Jules Bordet, Brussels, BelgiumChristine DesmedtLaboratory for Translational Breast Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, BelgiumChristine DesmedtTranslational Cancer Research Unit, GZA Hospitals St-Augustinus, Center for Oncological Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, BelgiumLuc Dirix, Steven Van Laere, Gert G. Van den Eynden & Peter VermeulenDepartment of Gynecology & Obstetrics and Department of Clinical Sciences, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, SwedenAnna EhingerIcelandic Cancer Registry, Icelandic Cancer Society, Reykjavik, IcelandJorunn E. Eyfjord, Holmfridur Hilmarsdottir & Jon G. JonassonDepartment of Medical Oncology, Josephine Nefkens Institute and Cancer Genomics Centre, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The NetherlandsJohn A. Foekens, John W. M. Martens, Anieta M. Sieuwerts & Marcel SmidNational Genotyping Center, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, TaiwanP. Andrew Futreal, Ming Ta Michael Lee & P. A. FutrealDepartment of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital Ulleval, Oslo, NorwayØystein GarredFaculty of Medicine and Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, NorwayØystein GarredDepartment of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USADilip D. Giri, Jorge Reis-Filho, Ronald Ghossein, Christine A. Iacobuzio-Donahue & Victor ReuterDepartment of Pathology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, SwedenDorthe GrabauDepartment of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The NetherlandsGerrit K. HooijerDepartment of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, South KoreaJocelyne Jacquemier, Hyung-Yong Kim & Gu KongDepartment of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, College of Medicine, Ulsan University, Songpa-gu, Seoul, South KoreaSe Jin Jang & Hee Jin LeeThe Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The NetherlandsJos JonkersDepartment of Surgery, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USATari A. KingDepartment of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USATari A. KingDepartment of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, NorwayStian Knappskog & Ola MyklebostMorgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USASavitri KrishnamurthyThe University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, The Royal Brisbane & Women’s Hospital, Herston, Queensland, AustraliaSunil R. Lakhani & Peter T. SimpsonDepartment of Pathology, Institut Jules Bordet, Brussels, BelgiumDenis LarsimontInstitute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research (IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul, South KoreaJeong-Yeon LeeUniversity of Oslo, Oslo, NorwayOle Christian Lingjærde & Torill SauerInstitut Bergonié, Bordeaux, FranceGaetan MacGroganDepartment of Research Oncology, Guy’s Hospital, King’s Health Partners AHSC, King’s College London School of Medicine, London, UKSarah PinderUniversity Hospital of Minjoz, INSERM UMR 1098, Besançon, FranceXavier PivotCambridge Breast Unit, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UKElena ProvenzanoEast of Scotland Breast Service, Ninewells Hospital, Aberdeen, UKColin A. PurdieOncologie Sénologie, ICM Institut Régional du Cancer, Montpellier, FranceGilles RomieuDepartment of Radiation Oncology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The NetherlandsPaul N. SpanUniversity of Iceland, Reykjavik, IcelandÓlafur Andri StefánssonDundee Cancer Centre, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, UKAlasdair Stenhouse & Alastair M. ThompsonInstitut Curie, INSERM Unit 830, Paris, FranceHenk G. Stunnenberg & Anne Vincent-SalomonDepartment of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The NetherlandsFred SweepDepartment of General Surgery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, SingaporeBenita Kiat Tee TanINCa-Synergie, Centre Léon Bérard, Universite Lyon, Lyon, FranceGilles ThomasGiovanni Paolo II/I.R.C.C.S. Cancer Institute, Bari, ItalyStefania TommasiDepartment of Biopathology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, FranceIsabelle TreilleuxUniversité Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, FranceIsabelle TreilleuxNCCS-VARI Translational Research Laboratory, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeBernice H. WongDepartment of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The NetherlandsCarolien H. M. van DeurzenDivision of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The NetherlandsLaura van’t VeerInstitute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, GermanyOle Ammerpohl, Andrea Haake, Cristina López, Julia Richter & Rabea WagenerInstitute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, GermanyOle Ammerpohl & Sietse AukemaUniversity Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, GermanyOle Ammerpohl & Sietse AukemaHematopathology Section, Institute of Pathology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, GermanySietse Aukema, Wolfram Klapper, Julia Richter & Monika SzczepanowskiDepartment of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, GermanyAnke K. BergmannDepartment of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, GermanyArndt Borkhardt & Jessica I. HoellDepartment of Internal Medicine/Hematology, Friedrich-Ebert-Hospital, Neumünster, GermanyChristoph Borst & Siegfried HaasPediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, GermanyBirgit BurkhardtDepartment of Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, GermanyAlexander ClaviezDepartment of Medicine II, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, GermanyMaria Elisabeth GoeblerSenckenberg Institute of Pathology, University of Frankfurt Medical School, Frankfurt, GermanyMartin HansmannInstitute of Pathology, Charité–University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, GermanyMichael Hummel & Dido LenzeDepartment for Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, GermanyDennis Karsch & Michael KnebaInstitute for Medical Informatics Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, GermanyMarkus Kreuz & Markus LoefflerDepartment of Hematology and Oncology, Georg-Augusts-University of Göttingen, Göttingen, GermanyDieter Kube & Lorenz H. P. TrümperInstitute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, GermanyRalf KüppersMVZ Department of Oncology, PraxisClinic am Johannisplatz, Leipzig, GermanyLuisa Mantovani-LöfflerInstitute of Pathology, Ulm University and University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, GermanyPeter MöllerDepartment of Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Hospital, Stuttgart, GermanyGerman OttPediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Giessen, Giessen, GermanyMarius RohdeInstitute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, GermanyPhilip C. Rosenstiel & Markus B. SchilhabelInstitute of Pathology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, GermanyAndreas RosenwaldDepartment of General Internal Medicine, University Kiel, Kiel, GermanyStefan SchreiberClinic for Hematology and Oncology, St-Antonius-Hospital, Eschweiler, GermanyPeter StaibDepartment for Internal Medicine III, University of Ulm and University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, GermanyStephan StilgenbauerNeuroblastoma Genomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyUmut H. ToprakDepartment of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, University of Cologne, Cologne, GermanyPablo LandgrafUniversity of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, GermanyPablo Landgraf & Guido ReifenbergerDepartment of Vertebrate Genomics/Otto Warburg Laboratory Gene Regulation and Systems Biology of Cancer, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, GermanyHans Lehrach, Hans-Jörg Warnatz & Marie-Laure YaspoSt Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USAPaul A. NorthcottHeidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, GermanyStefan M. PfisterGenomics and Proteomics Core Facility High Throughput Sequencing Unit, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyStephan WolfEpigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyYassen AssenovUniversity Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, GermanySarah MinnerMartini-Clinic, Prostate Cancer Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, GermanyThorsten SchlommInstitute of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, GermanyRonald Simon & Guido SauterDivision of Cancer Genome Research, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, GermanyHolger SültmannNational Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, IndiaNidhan K. Biswas, Arindam Maitra & Partha P. MajumderAdvanced Centre for Treatment Research & Education in Cancer, Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai, IndiaRajiv SarinDepartment of Pathology, General Hospital of Treviso, Department of Medicine, University of Padua, Treviso, ItalyAngelo P. Dei TosDepartment of Medicine (DIMED), Surgical Pathology Unit, University of Padua, Padua, ItalyMatteo FassanDepartment of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery Division, Division of Pathology and Clinical Laboratories, National Cancer Center Hospital, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, JapanNobuyoshi HiraokaDepartment of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, JapanHidenori OjimaDepartment of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, JapanTakuji OkusakaDepartment of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, JapanMasashi Fukayama & Tetsuo UshikuPreventive Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanShumpei Ishikawa, Hiroto Katoh & Daisuke KomuraGastric Surgery Division, Division of Pathology and Clinical Laboratories, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, JapanHitoshi KataiDepartment of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Kanagawa, JapanAkihiro SuzukiLaboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanHirokazu TaniguchiDepartment of Cancer Genome Informatics, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, JapanShinichi YachidaHiroshima University, Hiroshima, JapanHiroshi Aikata, Koji Arihiro, Kazuaki Chayama, Yoshiiku Kawakami & Hideki OhdanTokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, JapanShun-ichi Ariizumi & Masakazu YamamotoOsaka International Cancer Center, Osaka, JapanKunihito GotohWakayama Medical University, Wakayama, JapanShinya Hayami, Masaki Ueno & Hiroki YamaueHokkaido University, Sapporo, JapanSatoshi Hirano & Toru NakamuraDivision of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre, Singapore, SingaporeSu Pin ChooCholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program and Liver Fluke and Cholangiocarcinoma Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, ThailandNarong KhuntikeoLymphoma Genomic Translational Research Laboratory, National Cancer Centre, Singapore, SingaporeChoon Kiat OngCenter of Digestive Diseases and Liver Transplantation, Fundeni Clinical Institute, Bucharest, RomaniaIrinel PopescuDivision of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Keimyung University Dongsan Medical Center, Daegu, South KoreaKeun Soo AhnPathology, Hospital Clinic, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainMarta AymerichHematology, Hospital Clinic, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainArmando Lopez-GuillermoDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University Institute of Oncology-IUOPA, Oviedo, SpainCarlos López-Otín & Xose S. PuenteAnatomia Patológica, Hospital Clinic, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainElias CampoSpanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, Madrid, SpainElias CampoRoyal National Orthopaedic Hospital (Bolsover), London, UKFernanda AmaryDepartment of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, NorwayDaniel Baumhoer & Bodil BjerkehagenInstitute of Clinical Medicine and Institute of Oral Biology, University of Oslo, Oslo, NorwayBodil BjerkehagenResearch Department of Pathology, University College London Cancer Institute, London, UKNischalan PillayEast Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UKPatrick TarpeyRoyal National Orthopaedic Hospital (Stanmore), London, UKRoberto TiraboscoDivision of Orthopaedic Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, NorwayOlga ZaikovaDepartment of Pathology (Research), University College London Cancer Institute, London, UKAdrienne M. FlanaganRadcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKJacqueline BoultwoodUniversity of Pavia, Pavia, ItalyMario Cazzola & Luca MalcovatiKarolinska Institute, Stockholm, SwedenEva Hellstrom-Lindberg & Jesper LagergrenWellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UKJyoti NangaliaUniversity of Oxford, Oxford, UKParesh Vyas, Pelvender Gill, Katalin Karaszi, Adam Lambert, Luke Marsden & Clare VerrillSalford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UKYeng Ang, Hsiao-Wei Chen, Ritika Kundra & Francisco Sanchez-VegaGloucester Royal Hospital, Gloucester, UKHugh BarrRoyal Stoke University Hospital, Stoke-on-Trent, UKDuncan Beardsmore & Christopher UmbrichtSt Thomas’s Hospital, London, UKJames GossageImperial College NHS Trust, Imperial College London, London, UKGeorge B. HannaDepartment of Histopathology, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UKStephen J. HayesFaculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UKStephen J. HayesEdinburgh Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, UKTed R. HuppBarking Havering and Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Romford, UKDavid Khoo, Bogdan Czerniak & Adel El-NaggarKing’s College London and Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, UKJesper LagergrenCambridge Oesophagogastric Centre, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UKJ. Robert O’NeillNottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, UKSimon L. Parsons, Sylvia Asa & Ming TsaoSt Luke’s Cancer Centre, Royal Surrey County Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Guildford, UKShaun R. PrestonUniversity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USASonia Puig, Lori Boice, Mei Huang & Leigh B. ThorneNorfolk and Norwich University Hospital NHS Trust, Norwich, UKTom Roques, Matthew G. Cordes & Catrina C. FronickUniversity Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire NHS Trust, Coventry, UKSharmila SothiUniversity Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UKOlga TuckerCentre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen’s University, Belfast, UKRichard TurkingtonSchool of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UKTimothy J. UnderwoodWythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, UKIan WelchBarts Cancer Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UKDaniel M. Berney & Yong-Jie LuRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London and Sutton, London, UKDeclan Cahill, Nening M. Dennis, Tim Dudderidge, Cyril Fisher, Steven Hazell, Vincent Khoo, Pardeep Kumar, Naomi Livni, Erik Mayer, David Nicol, Christopher Ogden, Edward W. Rowe, Sarah Thomas, Alan Thompson, Nicholas van As & Rosalind A. EelesUniversity Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UKTim Dudderidge & Stephen B. BaylinHCA Laboratories, London, UKChristopher S. FosterUniversity of Liverpool, Liverpool, UKChristopher S. FosterAcademic Urology Group, Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKVincent J. GnanapragasamUniversity of Oxford, Oxford, Oxford, UKFreddie C. HamdyDepartment of Urology, James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAWilliam B. IsaacsSecond Military Medical University, Shanghai, ChinaYong-Jie Lu & Hongwei ZhangDepartment of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UKErik MayerThe Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, ChinaAnthony NgNuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford, UKClare VerrillDepartment of Histopathology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UKAnne Y. WarrenDepartment of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology and Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USARehan AkbaniLaboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USAKenneth AldapeCanada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Center, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaAdrian Ally, Miruna Balasundaram, Reanne Bowlby, Denise Brooks, Rebecca Carlsen, Eric Chuah, Noreen Dhalla, Robert A. Holt, Darlene Lee, Haiyan Irene Li, Yussanne Ma, Marco A. Marra, Michael Mayo, Richard A. Moore, Andrew J. Mungall, Karen Mungall, A. Gordon Robertson, Sara Sadeghi, Jacqueline E. Schein, Payal Sipahimalani, Angela Tam, Nina Thiessen & Tina WongCenter for Molecular Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USAJoshua Armenia, Hsiao-Wei Chen, Jianjiong Gao, Ritika Kundra, Francisco Sanchez-Vega, Nikolaus Schultz & Hongxin ZhangUniversity Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaSylvia Asa & Ming TsaoDepartment of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USAJ. Todd AumanDepartment of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USAJill Barnholtz-SloanResearch Health Analytics and Informatics, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USAJill Barnholtz-SloanArnie Charbonneau Cancer Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, CanadaOliver F. BatheDepartment of Surgery and Department of Oncology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, CanadaOliver F. BatheBuck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA, USAChristopher Benz & Christina YauDuke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USAAndrew BerchuckUSC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USAMario Berrios, Moiz S. Bootwalla, Andrea Holbrook, Phillip H. Lai, Dennis T. Maglinte, David J. Van Den Berg & Daniel J. WeisenbergerThe Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USADarell BignerDepartment of Dermatology and Department of Pathology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USAMarcus BosenbergFox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USAJeffrey Boyd & Elaine R. MardisDepartment of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAMalcolm BrockUniversity of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USAThomas E. CareyUniversity of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USARobert CerfolioDivision of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USAVishal S. ChandanDivision of Experimental Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USAJeremy ChienDepartment of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USALeslie Cope, Ludmila Danilova & Ralph H. HrubanInternational Genomics Consortium, Phoenix, AZ, USAErin Curley & Troy SheltonDepartment of Pediatrics and Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USAIan J. DavisDepartment of Pathology, UPMC Shadyside, Pittsburgh, PA, USARajiv DhirCenter for Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAMartin L. FergusonDepartment of Neuro-Oncology, Istituto Neurologico Besta, Milan, ItalyGaetano FinocchiaroUniversity of Queensland Thoracic Research Centre, The Prince Charles Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliaKwun M. FongDepartment of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USAWilliam FriedmanCenter for Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USANils GehlenborgDepartment of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAJeffrey E. GershenwaldDepartment of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAJeffrey E. GershenwaldDivision of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USANasra H. Giama, Catherine D. Moser & Lewis R. RobertsSylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USACarmen GomezDepartment of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USAD. Neil HayesUniversity of Tennessee Health Science Center for Cancer Research, Memphis, TN, USAD. Neil HayesCentre for Translational and Applied Genomics, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaDavid HuntsmanDepartment of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USAMichael IttmannMichael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, TX, USAMichael IttmannCarolina Center for Genome Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USACorbin D. JonesCanada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaSteven J. M. Jones & Katayoon KasaianIndivumed, Hamburg, GermanyHartmut JuhlDivision of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Keimyung University Dong-san Medical Center, Daegu, South KoreaKoo Jeong KangWomen’s Cancer Program at the Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USABeth KarlanDepartment of Surgery, School of Medicine and Health Science, The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USAElectron KebebewEndocrine Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAElectron KebebewNational Cancer Center, Gyeonggi, South KoreaHark Kyun KimILSbio, LLC Biobank, Chestertown, MD, USAXuan LeGynecologic Oncology, NYU Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York University, New York, NY, USADouglas A. LevineDivision of Oncology, Stem Cell Biology Section, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USATim LeyUrologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAW. M. LinehanInstitute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USALisa Lype, Sheila M. Reynolds & Ilya ShmulevichCenter for Personalized Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USADennis T. MaglinteInstitute for Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USAElaine R. MardisDepartment of Surgery, Duke University, Durham, NC, USAJeffrey MarksDepartment of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Services, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USAKaren McCune & Karen Smith-McCuneDepartment of Neurology and Department of Neurosurgery, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USATom MikkelsenKnight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USAGordon B. MillsDepartment of Pathology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USACarl MorrisonDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USADavid MutchDepartment of Palliative, Rehabilitation and Integrative Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USADonna M. MuznyPenrose St Francis Health Services, Colorado Springs, CO, USAJerome MyersThe University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USAPeter O’DonnellDepartment of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USABrian Patrick O’NeillCenter for Liver Cancer, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center, Gyeonggi, South KoreaJoong-Won ParkDepartment of Genetics and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USAJoel S. Parker & Matthew G. SolowayNYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USAHarvey PassDepartment of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USANathan A. PennellDepartment of Genetics, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USACharles M. PerouHelen F. Graham Cancer Center at Christiana Care Health Systems, Newark, DE, USANicholas PetrelliCureline, South San Francisco, CA, USAOlga PotapovaDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USAJanet S. RaderHematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USASuresh RamalingamVanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USAW. Kimryn RathmellOhio State University College of Medicine and Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USAMatthew RingelResearch Computing Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USAJeffrey RoachAnalytical Biological Services, Wilmington, DE, USACharles SallerDepartment of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, Westdeutsches Tumorzentrum and German Cancer Consortium, Essen, GermanyDirk SchadendorfUniversity of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USARaja SeethalaMurtha Cancer Center, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, MD, USACraig ShriverBrigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USASabina SignorettiDepartment of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USASamuel SingerDepartment of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, and Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNA, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USAAnil K. SoodDepartment of Urology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USAR. Houston ThompsonDepartment of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAChristopher UmbrichtDepartment of Neurosurgery, Department of Hematology and Department of Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute and School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USAErwin G. Van MeirGeorgia Regents University Cancer Center, Augusta, GA, USAPaul WeinbergerThoracic Oncology Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USADennis WigleInstitute for Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USARichard K. WilsonDepartment of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USABoris WinterhoffInternational Institute for Molecular Oncology, Poznań, PolandMaciej WiznerowiczPoznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, PolandMaciej WiznerowiczEdison Family Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University, St Louis, MO, USAWinghing WongConsortiaThe ICGC/TCGA Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes ConsortiumPeter J. Campbell, Gad Getz, Jan O. Korbel, Joshua M. Stuart, Jennifer L. Jennings, Lincoln D. Stein, Marc D. Perry, Hardeep K. Nahal-Bose, B. F. Francis Ouellette, Constance H. Li, Esther Rheinbay, G. Petur Nielsen, Dennis C. Sgroi, Chin-Lee Wu, William C. Faquin, Vikram Deshpande, Paul C. Boutros, Alexander J. Lazar, Katherine A. Hoadley, David N. Louis, L. Jonathan Dursi, Christina K. Yung, Matthew H. Bailey, Gordon Saksena, Keiran M. Raine, Ivo Buchhalter, Kortine Kleinheinz, Matthias Schlesner, Junjun Zhang, Wenyi Wang, David A. Wheeler, Li Ding, Jared T. Simpson, Brian D. O’Connor, Sergei Yakneen, Kyle Ellrott, Naoki Miyoshi, Adam P. Butler, Romina Royo, Solomon I. Shorser, Miguel Vazquez, Tobias Rausch, Grace Tiao, Sebastian M. Waszak, Bernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Suyash Shringarpure, Dai-Ying Wu, German M. Demidov, Olivier Delaneau, Shuto Hayashi, Seiya Imoto, Nina Habermann, Ayellet V. Segre, Erik Garrison, Andy Cafferkey, Eva G. Alvarez, José María Heredia-Genestar, Francesc Muyas, Oliver Drechsel, Alicia L. Bruzos, Javier Temes, Jorge Zamora, Adrian Baez-Ortega, Hyung-Lae Kim, R. Jay Mashl, Kai Ye, Anthony DiBiase, Kuan-lin Huang, Ivica Letunic, Michael D. McLellan, Steven J. Newhouse, Tal Shmaya, Sushant Kumar, David C. Wedge, Mark H. Wright, Venkata D. Yellapantula, Mark Gerstein, Ekta Khurana, Tomas Marques-Bonet, Arcadi Navarro, Carlos D. Bustamante, Reiner Siebert, Hidewaki Nakagawa, Douglas F. Easton, Stephan Ossowski, Jose M. C. Tubio, Francisco M. De La Vega, Xavier Estivill, Denis Yuen, George L. Mihaiescu, Larsson Omberg, Vincent Ferretti, Radhakrishnan Sabarinathan, Oriol Pich, Abel Gonzalez-Perez, Amaro Taylor-Weiner, Matthew W. Fittall, Jonas Demeulemeester, Maxime Tarabichi, Nicola D. Roberts, Peter Van Loo, Isidro Cortés-Ciriano, Lara Urban, Peter Park, Bin Zhu, Esa Pitkänen, Yilong Li, Natalie Saini, Leszek J. Klimczak, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Nikos Sidiropoulos, Ludmil B. Alexandrov, Raquel Rabionet, Georgia Escaramis, Mattia Bosio, Aliaksei Z. Holik, Hana Susak, Aparna Prasad, Serap Erkek, Claudia Calabrese, Benjamin Raeder, Eoghan Harrington, Simon Mayes, Daniel Turner, Sissel Juul, Steven A. Roberts, Lei Song, Roelof Koster, Lisa Mirabello, Xing Hua, Tomas J. Tanskanen, Marta Tojo, Jieming Chen, Lauri A. Aaltonen, Gunnar Rätsch, Roland F. Schwarz, Atul J. Butte, Alvis Brazma, Stephen J. Chanock, Nilanjan Chatterjee, Oliver Stegle, Olivier Harismendy, G. Steven Bova, Dmitry A. Gordenin, David Haan, Lina Sieverling, Lars Feuerbach, Don Chalmers, Yann Joly, Bartha Knoppers, Fruzsina Molnár-Gábor, Mark Phillips, Adrian Thorogood, David Townend, Mary Goldman, Nuno A. Fonseca, Qian Xiang, Brian Craft, Elena Piñeiro-Yáñez, Alfonso Muñoz, Robert Petryszak, Anja Füllgrabe, Fatima Al-Shahrour, Maria Keays, David Haussler, John Weinstein, Wolfgang Huber, Alfonso Valencia, Irene Papatheodorou, Jingchun Zhu, Yu Fan, David Torrents, Matthias Bieg, Ken Chen, Zechen Chong, Kristian Cibulskis, Roland Eils, Robert S. Fulton, Josep L. Gelpi, Santiago Gonzalez, Ivo G. Gut, Faraz Hach, Michael Heinold, Taobo Hu, Vincent Huang, Barbara Hutter, Natalie Jäger, Jongsun Jung, Yogesh Kumar, Christopher Lalansingh, Ignaty Leshchiner, Dimitri Livitz, Eric Z. Ma, Yosef E. Maruvka, Ana Milovanovic, Morten Muhlig Nielsen, Nagarajan Paramasivam, Jakob Skou Pedersen, Montserrat Puiggròs, S. Cenk Sahinalp, Iman Sarrafi, Chip Stewart, Miranda D. Stobbe, Jeremiah A. Wala, Jiayin Wang, Michael Wendl, Johannes Werner, Zhenggang Wu, Hong Xue, Takafumi N. Yamaguchi, Venkata Yellapantula, Brandi N. Davis-Dusenbery, Robert L. Grossman, Youngwook Kim, Michael C. Heinold, Jonathan Hinton, David R. Jones, Andrew Menzies, Lucy Stebbings, Julian M. Hess, Mara Rosenberg, Andrew J. Dunford, Manaswi Gupta, Marcin Imielinski, Matthew Meyerson, Rameen Beroukhim, Jüri Reimand, Priyanka Dhingra, Francesco Favero, Stefan Dentro, Jeff Wintersinger, Vasilisa Rudneva, Ji Wan Park, Eun Pyo Hong, Seong Gu Heo, André Kahles, Kjong-Van Lehmann, Cameron M. Soulette, Yuichi Shiraishi, Fenglin Liu, Yao He, Deniz Demircioğlu, Natalie R. Davidson, Liliana Greger, Siliang Li, Dongbing Liu, Stefan G. Stark, Fan Zhang, Samirkumar B. Amin, Peter Bailey, Aurélien Chateigner, Milana Frenkel-Morgenstern, Yong Hou, Matthew R. Huska, Helena Kilpinen, Fabien C. Lamaze, Chang Li, Xiaobo Li, Xinyue Li, Xingmin Liu, Maximillian G. Marin, Julia Markowski, Tannistha Nandi, Akinyemi I. Ojesina, Qiang Pan-Hammarström, Peter J. Park, Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu, Hong Su, Patrick Tan, Bin Tean Teh, Jian Wang, Heng Xiong, Chen Ye, Christina Yung, Xiuqing Zhang, Liangtao Zheng, Shida Zhu, Philip Awadalla, Chad J. Creighton, Kui Wu, Huanming Yang, Jonathan Göke, Zemin Zhang, Angela N. Brooks, Matthew W Fittall, Iñigo Martincorena, Carlota Rubio-Perez, Malene Juul, Steven Schumacher, Ofer Shapira, David Tamborero, Loris Mularoni, Henrik Hornshøj, Jordi Deu-Pons, Ferran Muiños, Johanna Bertl, Qianyun Guo, Abel Gonzalez-Perez, Qian Xiang, Wojciech Bazant, Elisabet Barrera, Sultan T. Al-Sedairy, Axel Aretz, Cindy Bell, Miguel Betancourt, Christiane Buchholz, Fabien Calvo, Christine Chomienne, Michael Dunn, Stuart Edmonds, Eric Green, Shailja Gupta, Carolyn M. Hutter, Karine Jegalian, Nic Jones, Youyong Lu, Hitoshi Nakagama, Gerd Nettekoven, Laura Planko, David Scott, Tatsuhiro Shibata, Kiyo Shimizu, Michael R. Stratton, Takashi Yugawa, Giampaolo Tortora, K. VijayRaghavan, Jean C. Zenklusen, David Townend, Bartha M. Knoppers, Brice Aminou, Javier Bartolome, Keith A. Boroevich, Rich Boyce, Alex Buchanan, Niall J. Byrne, Zhaohong Chen, Sunghoon Cho, Wan Choi, Peter Clapham, Michelle T. Dow, Lewis Jonathan Dursi, Juergen Eils, Claudiu Farcas, Nodirjon Fayzullaev, Paul Flicek, Allison P. Heath, Oliver Hofmann, Jongwhi H. Hong, Thomas J. Hudson, Daniel Hübschmann, Sinisa Ivkovic, Seung-Hyup Jeon, Wei Jiao, Rolf Kabbe, Andre Kahles, Jules N. A. Kerssemakers, Hyunghwan Kim, Jihoon Kim, Michael Koscher, Antonios Koures, Milena Kovacevic, Chris Lawerenz, Jia Liu, Sanja Mijalkovic, Ana Mijalkovic Mijalkovic-Lazic, Satoru Miyano, Mia Nastic, Jonathan Nicholson, David Ocana, Kazuhiro Ohi, Lucila Ohno-Machado, Todd D. Pihl, Manuel Prinz, Petar Radovic, Charles Short, Heidi J. Sofia, Jonathan Spring, Adam J. Struck, Nebojsa Tijanic, David Vicente, Zhining Wang, Ashley Williams, Youngchoon Woo, Adam J. Wright, Liming Yang, Mark P. Hamilton, Todd A. Johnson, Abdullah Kahraman, Manolis Kellis, Paz Polak, Richard Sallari, Nasa Sinnott-Armstrong, Christian von Mering, Sergi Beltran, Daniela S. Gerhard, Marta Gut, Jean-Rémi Trotta, Justin P. Whalley, Beifang Niu, Shadrielle M. G. Espiritu, Shengjie Gao, Yi Huang, Christopher M. Lalansingh, Jon W. Teague, Michael C. Wendl, Federico Abascal, Gary D. Bader, Pratiti Bandopadhayay, Jonathan Barenboim, Søren Brunak, Joana Carlevaro-Fita, Dimple Chakravarty, Calvin Wing Yiu Chan, Jung Kyoon Choi, Klev Diamanti, J. Lynn Fink, Joan Frigola, Carlo Gambacorti-Passerini, Dale W. Garsed, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Arif O. Harmanci, Mohamed Helmy, Carl Herrmann, Asger Hobolth, Ermin Hodzic, Chen Hong, Keren Isaev, Jose M. G. Izarzugaza, Rory Johnson, Randi Istrup Juul, Jaegil Kim, Jong K. Kim,  Jan Komorowski, Andrés Lanzós, Erik Larsson, Donghoon Lee, Shantao Li, Xiaotong Li, Ziao Lin, Eric Minwei Liu, Lucas Lochovsky, Shaoke Lou, Tobias Madsen, Kathleen Marchal, Alexander Martinez-Fundichely, Patrick D. McGillivray, William Meyerson, Marta Paczkowska, Keunchil Park, Kiejung Park, Tirso Pons, Sergio Pulido-Tamayo, Iker Reyes-Salazar, Matthew A. Reyna, Mark A. Rubin, Leonidas Salichos, Chris Sander, Steven E. Schumacher, Mark Shackleton, Ciyue Shen, Raunak Shrestha, Shimin Shuai, Tatsuhiko Tsunoda, Husen M. Umer, Liis Uusküla-Reimand, Lieven P. C. Verbeke, Claes Wadelius, Lina Wadi, Jonathan Warrell, Guanming Wu, Jun Yu, Jing Zhang, Xuanping Zhang, Yan Zhang, Zhongming Zhao, Lihua Zou, Michael S. Lawrence, Benjamin J. Raphael, Peter J. Bailey, David Craft, Mary J. Goldman, Hiroyuki Aburatani, Hans Binder, Huy Q. Dinh, Simon C. Heath, Steve Hoffmann, Charles David Imbusch, Helene Kretzmer, Peter W. Laird, Jose I. Martin-Subero, Genta Nagae, Hui Shen, Qi Wang, Dieter Weichenhan, Wanding Zhou, Benjamin P. Berman, Benedikt Brors, Christoph Plass, Kadir C. Akdemir, David D. L. Bowtell, Kathleen H. Burns, John Busanovich, Kin Chan, Ana Dueso-Barroso, Paul A. Edwards, Dariush Etemadmoghadam, James E. Haber, David T. W. Jones, Young Seok Ju, Marat D. Kazanov, Youngil Koh, Kiran Kumar, Eunjung Alice Lee, Jake June-Koo Lee, Andy G. Lynch, Geoff Macintyre, Florian Markowetz, Fabio C. P. Navarro, John V. Pearson, Karsten Rippe, Ralph Scully, Izar Villasante, Nicola Waddell, Lixing Yang, Xiaotong Yao, Sung-Soo Yoon, Cheng-Zhong Zhang, Erik N. Bergstrom, Arnoud Boot, Kyle Covington, Akihiro Fujimoto, Mi Ni Huang, S. M. Ashiqul Islam, John R. McPherson, Sandro Morganella, Ville Mustonen, Alvin Wei Tian Ng, Stephenie D. Prokopec, Ignacio Vázquez-García, Yang Wu, Fouad Yousif, Willie Yu, Steven G. Rozen, Vasilisa A. Rudneva, Suyash S. Shringarpure, Daniel J. Turner, Tian Xia, Gurnit Atwal, David K. Chang, Susanna L. Cooke, Bishoy M. Faltas, Syed Haider, Vera B. Kaiser, Rosa Karlić, Mamoru Kato, Kirsten Kübler, Adam Margolin, Sancha Martin, Serena Nik-Zainal, Christine P’ng, Colin A. Semple, Jaclyn Smith, Ren X. Sun, Kevin Thai, Derek W. Wright, Ke Yuan, Andrew V. Biankin, Levi Garraway, Sean M. Grimmond, David J. Adams, Pavana Anur, Shaolong Cao, Elizabeth L. Christie, Marek Cmero, Yupeng Cun, Kevin J. Dawson, Stefan C. Dentro, Amit G. Deshwar, Nilgun Donmez, Ruben M. Drews, Moritz Gerstung, Gavin Ha, Kerstin Haase, Lara Jerman, Yuan Ji, Clemency Jolly, Juhee Lee, Henry Lee-Six, Salem Malikic, Thomas J. Mitchell, Quaid D. Morris, Layla Oesper, Martin Peifer, Myron Peto, Daniel Rosebrock, Yulia Rubanova, Adriana Salcedo, Subhajit Sengupta, Ruian Shi, Seung Jun Shin, Oliver Spiro, Shankar Vembu, Jeffrey A. Wintersinger, Tsun-Po Yang, Kaixian Yu, Hongtu Zhu, Paul T. Spellman, John N. Weinstein, Yiwen Chen, Masashi Fujita, Leng Han, Takanori Hasegawa, Mitsuhiro Komura, Jun Li, Shinichi Mizuno, Eigo Shimizu, Yumeng Wang, Yanxun Xu, Rui Yamaguchi, Fan Yang, Yang Yang, Christopher J. Yoon, Yuan Yuan, Han Liang, Malik Alawi, Ivan Borozan, Daniel S. Brewer, Colin S. Cooper, Nikita Desai, Adam Grundhoff, Murat Iskar, Xiaoping Su, Marc Zapatka, Peter Lichter, Kathryn Alsop, Timothy J. C. Bruxner, Angelika N. Christ, Stephen M. Cordner, Prue A. Cowin, Ronny Drapkin, Sian Fereday, Joshy George, Anne Hamilton, Oliver Holmes, Jillian A. Hung, Karin S. Kassahn, Stephen H. Kazakoff, Catherine J. Kennedy, Conrad R. Leonard, Linda Mileshkin, David K. Miller, Gisela Mir Arnau, Chris Mitchell, Felicity Newell, Katia Nones, Ann-Marie Patch, Michael C. Quinn, Darrin F. Taylor, Heather Thorne, Nadia Traficante, Ravikiran Vedururu, Nick M. Waddell, Paul M. Waring, Scott Wood, Qinying Xu, Anna deFazio, Matthew J. Anderson, Davide Antonello, Andrew P. Barbour, Claudio Bassi, Samantha Bersani, Ivana Cataldo, Lorraine A. Chantrill, Yoke-Eng Chiew, Angela Chou, Sara Cingarlini, Nicole Cloonan, Vincenzo Corbo, Maria Vittoria Davi, Fraser R. Duthie, Anthony J. Gill, Janet S. Graham, Ivon Harliwong, Nigel B. Jamieson, Amber L. Johns, James G. Kench, Luca Landoni, Rita T. Lawlor, Andrea Mafficini, Neil D. Merrett, Marco Miotto, Elizabeth A. Musgrove, Adnan M. Nagrial, Karin A. Oien, Marina Pajic, Mark Pinese, Alan J. Robertson, Ilse Rooman, Borislav C. Rusev, Jaswinder S. Samra, Maria Scardoni, Christopher J. Scarlett, Aldo Scarpa, Elisabetta Sereni, Katarzyna O. Sikora, Michele Simbolo, Morgan L. Taschuk, Christopher W. Toon, Caterina Vicentini, Jianmin Wu, Nikolajs Zeps, Andreas Behren, Hazel Burke, Jonathan Cebon, Rebecca A. Dagg, Ricardo De Paoli-Iseppi, Ken Dutton-Regester, Matthew A. Field, Anna Fitzgerald, Peter Hersey, Valerie Jakrot, Peter A. Johansson, Hojabr Kakavand, Richard F. Kefford, Loretta M. S. Lau, Georgina V. Long, Hilda A. Pickett, Antonia L. Pritchard, Gulietta M. Pupo, Robyn P. M. Saw, Sarah-Jane Schramm, Catherine A. Shang, Ping Shang, Andrew J. Spillane, Jonathan R. Stretch, Varsha Tembe, John F. Thompson, Ricardo E. Vilain, James S. Wilmott, Jean Y. Yang, Nicholas K. Hayward, Graham J. Mann, Richard A. Scolyer, John Bartlett, Prashant Bavi, Dianne E. Chadwick, Michelle Chan-Seng-Yue, Sean Cleary, Ashton A. Connor, Karolina Czajka, Robert E. Denroche, Neesha C. Dhani, Jenna Eagles, Steven Gallinger, Robert C. Grant, David Hedley, Michael A. Hollingsworth, Gun Ho Jang, Jeremy Johns, Sangeetha Kalimuthu, Sheng-Ben Liang, Ilinca Lungu, Xuemei Luo, Faridah Mbabaali, Treasa A. McPherson, Jessica K. Miller, Malcolm J. Moore, Faiyaz Notta, Danielle Pasternack, Gloria M. Petersen, Michael H. A. Roehrl, Michelle Sam, Iris Selander, Stefano Serra, Sagedeh Shahabi, Sarah P. Thayer, Lee E. Timms, Gavin W. Wilson, Julie M. Wilson, Bradly G. Wouters, John D. McPherson, Timothy A. Beck, Vinayak Bhandari, Colin C. Collins, Neil E. Fleshner, Natalie S. Fox, Michael Fraser, Lawrence E. Heisler, Emilie Lalonde, Julie Livingstone, Alice Meng, Veronica Y. Sabelnykova, Yu-Jia Shiah, Theodorus Van der Kwast, Robert G. Bristow, Shuai Ding, Daiming Fan, Lin Li, Yongzhan Nie, Xiao Xiao, Rui Xing, Shanlin Yang, Yingyan Yu, Yong Zhou, Rosamonde E. Banks, Guillaume Bourque, Paul Brennan, Louis Letourneau, Yasser Riazalhosseini, Ghislaine Scelo, Naveen Vasudev, Juris Viksna, Mark Lathrop, Jörg Tost, Sung-Min Ahn, Samuel Aparicio, Laurent Arnould, M. R. Aure, Shriram G. Bhosle, Ewan Birney, Ake Borg, Sandrine Boyault, Arie B. Brinkman, Jane E. Brock, Annegien Broeks, Anne-Lise Børresen-Dale, Carlos Caldas, Suet-Feung Chin, Helen Davies, Christine Desmedt, Luc Dirix, Serge Dronov, Anna Ehinger, Jorunn E. Eyfjord, Aquila Fatima, John A. Foekens, P. Andrew Futreal, Øystein Garred, Dilip D. Giri, Dominik Glodzik, Dorthe Grabau, Holmfridur Hilmarsdottir, Gerrit K. Hooijer, Jocelyne Jacquemier, Se Jin Jang, Jon G. Jonasson, Jos Jonkers, Hyung-Yong Kim, Tari A. King, Stian Knappskog, Gu Kong, Savitri Krishnamurthy, Sunil R. Lakhani, Anita Langerød, Denis Larsimont, Hee Jin Lee, Jeong-Yeon Lee, Ming Ta Michael Lee, Ole Christian Lingjærde, Gaetan MacGrogan, John W. M. Martens, Sarah O’Meara, Iris Pauporté, Sarah Pinder, Xavier Pivot, Elena Provenzano, Colin A. Purdie, Manasa Ramakrishna, Kamna Ramakrishnan, Jorge Reis-Filho, Andrea L. Richardson, Markus Ringnér, Javier Bartolomé Rodriguez, F. Germán Rodríguez-González, Gilles Romieu, Roberto Salgado, Torill Sauer, Rebecca Shepherd, Anieta M. Sieuwerts, Peter T. Simpson, Marcel Smid, Christos Sotiriou, Paul N. Span, Ólafur Andri Stefánsson, Alasdair Stenhouse, Henk G. Stunnenberg, Fred Sweep, Benita Kiat Tee Tan, Gilles Thomas, Alastair M. Thompson, Stefania Tommasi, Isabelle Treilleux, Andrew Tutt, Naoto T. Ueno, Steven Van Laere, Gert G. Van den Eynden, Peter Vermeulen, Alain Viari, Anne Vincent-Salomon, Bernice H. Wong, Lucy Yates, Xueqing Zou, Carolien H. M. van Deurzen, Marc J. van de Vijver, Laura van’t Veer, Ole Ammerpohl, Sietse Aukema, Anke K. Bergmann, Stephan H. Bernhart, Arndt Borkhardt, Christoph Borst, Birgit Burkhardt, Alexander Claviez, Maria Elisabeth Goebler, Andrea Haake, Siegfried Haas, Martin Hansmann, Jessica I. Hoell, Michael Hummel, Dennis Karsch, Wolfram Klapper, Michael Kneba, Markus Kreuz, Dieter Kube, Ralf Küppers, Dido Lenze, Markus Loeffler, Cristina López, Luisa Mantovani-Löffler, Peter Möller, German Ott, Bernhard Radlwimmer, Julia Richter, Marius Rohde, Philip C. Rosenstiel, Andreas Rosenwald, Markus B. Schilhabel, Stefan Schreiber, Peter F. Stadler, Peter Staib, Stephan Stilgenbauer, Stephanie Sungalee, Monika Szczepanowski, Umut H. Toprak, Lorenz H. P. Trümper, Rabea Wagener, Thorsten Zenz, Volker Hovestadt, Christof von Kalle, Marcel Kool, Andrey Korshunov, Pablo Landgraf, Hans Lehrach, Paul A. Northcott, Stefan M. Pfister, Guido Reifenberger, Hans-Jörg Warnatz, Stephan Wolf, Marie-Laure Yaspo, Yassen Assenov, Clarissa Gerhauser, Sarah Minner, Thorsten Schlomm, Ronald Simon, Guido Sauter, Holger Sültmann, Nidhan K. Biswas, Arindam Maitra, Partha P. Majumder, Rajiv Sarin, Stefano Barbi, Giada Bonizzato, Cinzia Cantù, Angelo P. Dei Tos, Matteo Fassan, Sonia Grimaldi, Claudio Luchini, Giuseppe Malleo, Giovanni Marchegiani, Michele Milella, Salvatore Paiella, Antonio Pea, Paolo Pederzoli, Andrea Ruzzenente, Roberto Salvia, Nicola Sperandio, Yasuhito Arai, Natsuko Hama, Nobuyoshi Hiraoka, Fumie Hosoda, Hiromi Nakamura, Hidenori Ojima, Takuji Okusaka, Yasushi Totoki, Tomoko Urushidate, Masashi Fukayama, Shumpei Ishikawa, Hitoshi Katai, Hiroto Katoh, Daisuke Komura, Hirofumi Rokutan, Mihoko Saito-Adachi, Akihiro Suzuki, Hirokazu Taniguchi, Kenji Tatsuno, Tetsuo Ushiku, Shinichi Yachida, Shogo Yamamoto, Hiroshi Aikata, Koji Arihiro, Shun-ichi Ariizumi, Kazuaki Chayama, Mayuko Furuta, Kunihito Gotoh, Shinya Hayami, Satoshi Hirano, Yoshiiku Kawakami, Kazuhiro Maejima, Toru Nakamura, Kaoru Nakano, Hideki Ohdan, Aya Sasaki-Oku, Hiroko Tanaka, Masaki Ueno, Masakazu Yamamoto, Hiroki Yamaue, Su Pin Choo, Ioana Cutcutache, Narong Khuntikeo, Choon Kiat Ong, Chawalit Pairojkul, Irinel Popescu, Keun Soo Ahn, Marta Aymerich, Armando Lopez-Guillermo, Carlos López-Otín, Xose S. Puente, Elias Campo, Fernanda Amary, Daniel Baumhoer, Sam Behjati, Bodil Bjerkehagen, P. A. Futreal, Ola Myklebost, Nischalan Pillay, Patrick Tarpey, Roberto Tirabosco, Olga Zaikova, Adrienne M. Flanagan, Jacqueline Boultwood, David T. Bowen, Mario Cazzola, Anthony R. Green, Eva Hellstrom-Lindberg, Luca Malcovati, Jyoti Nangalia, Elli Papaemmanuil, Paresh Vyas, Yeng Ang, Hugh Barr, Duncan Beardsmore, Matthew Eldridge, James Gossage, Nicola Grehan, George B. Hanna, Stephen J. Hayes, Ted R. Hupp, David Khoo, Jesper Lagergren, Laurence B. Lovat, Shona MacRae, Maria O’Donovan, J. Robert O’Neill, Simon L. Parsons, Shaun R. Preston, Sonia Puig, Tom Roques, Grant Sanders, Sharmila Sothi, Simon Tavaré, Olga Tucker, Richard Turkington, Timothy J. Underwood, Ian Welch, Rebecca C. Fitzgerald, Daniel M. Berney, Johann S. De Bono, Declan Cahill, Niedzica Camacho, Nening M. Dennis, Tim Dudderidge, Sandra E. Edwards, Cyril Fisher, Christopher S. Foster, Mohammed Ghori, Pelvender Gill, Vincent J. Gnanapragasam, Gunes Gundem, Freddie C. Hamdy, Steve Hawkins, Steven Hazell, William Howat, William B. Isaacs, Katalin Karaszi, Jonathan D. Kay, Vincent Khoo, Zsofia Kote-Jarai, Barbara Kremeyer, Pardeep Kumar, Adam Lambert, Daniel A. Leongamornlert, Naomi Livni, Yong-Jie Lu, Hayley J. Luxton, Luke Marsden, Charlie E. Massie, Lucy Matthews, Erik Mayer, Ultan McDermott, Sue Merson, David E. Neal, Anthony Ng, David Nicol, Christopher Ogden, Edward W. Rowe, Nimish C. Shah, Sarah Thomas, Alan Thompson, Clare Verrill, Tapio Visakorpi, Anne Y. Warren, Hayley C. Whitaker, Hongwei Zhang, Nicholas van As, Rosalind A. Eeles, Adam Abeshouse, Nishant Agrawal, Rehan Akbani, Hikmat Al-Ahmadie, Monique Albert, Kenneth Aldape, Adrian Ally, Elizabeth L. Appelbaum, Joshua Armenia, Sylvia Asa, J. Todd Auman, Miruna Balasundaram, Saianand Balu, Jill Barnholtz-Sloan, Oliver F. Bathe, Stephen B. Baylin, Christopher Benz, Andrew Berchuck, Mario Berrios, Darell Bigner, Michael Birrer, Tom Bodenheimer, Lori Boice, Moiz S. Bootwalla, Marcus Bosenberg, Reanne Bowlby, Jeffrey Boyd, Russell R. Broaddus, Malcolm Brock, Denise Brooks, Susan Bullman, Samantha J. Caesar-Johnson, Thomas E. Carey, Rebecca Carlsen, Robert Cerfolio, Vishal S. Chandan, Hsiao-Wei Chen, Andrew D. Cherniack, Jeremy Chien, Juok Cho, Eric Chuah, Carrie Cibulskis, Leslie Cope, Matthew G. Cordes, Erin Curley, Bogdan Czerniak, Ludmila Danilova, Ian J. Davis, Timothy Defreitas, John A. Demchok, Noreen Dhalla, Rajiv Dhir, HarshaVardhan Doddapaneni, Adel El-Naggar, Ina Felau, Martin L. Ferguson, Gaetano Finocchiaro, Kwun M. Fong, Scott Frazer, William Friedman, Catrina C. Fronick, Lucinda A. Fulton, Stacey B. Gabriel, Jianjiong Gao, Nils Gehlenborg, Jeffrey E. Gershenwald, Ronald Ghossein, Nasra H. Giama, Richard A. Gibbs, Carmen Gomez, Ramaswamy Govindan, D. Neil Hayes, Apurva M. Hegde, David I. Heiman, Zachary Heins, Austin J. Hepperla, Andrea Holbrook, Robert A. Holt, Alan P. Hoyle, Ralph H. Hruban, Jianhong Hu, Mei Huang, David Huntsman, Jason Huse, Christine A. Iacobuzio-Donahue, Michael Ittmann, Joy C. Jayaseelan, Stuart R. Jefferys, Corbin D. Jones, Steven J. M. Jones, Hartmut Juhl, Koo Jeong Kang, Beth Karlan, Katayoon Kasaian, Electron Kebebew, Hark Kyun Kim, Viktoriya Korchina, Ritika Kundra, Phillip H. Lai, Eric Lander, Xuan Le, Darlene Lee, Douglas A. Levine, Lora Lewis, Tim Ley, Haiyan Irene Li, Pei Lin, W. M. Linehan, Fei Fei Liu, Yiling Lu, Lisa Lype, Yussanne Ma, Dennis T. Maglinte, Elaine R. Mardis, Jeffrey Marks, Marco A. Marra, Thomas J. Matthew, Michael Mayo, Karen McCune, Samuel R. Meier, Shaowu Meng, Piotr A. Mieczkowski, Tom Mikkelsen, Christopher A. Miller, Gordon B. Mills, Richard A. Moore, Carl Morrison, Lisle E. Mose, Catherine D. Moser, Andrew J. Mungall, Karen Mungall, David Mutch, Donna M. Muzny, Jerome Myers, Yulia Newton, Michael S. Noble, Peter O’Donnell, Brian Patrick O’Neill, Angelica Ochoa, Joong-Won Park, Joel S. Parker, Harvey Pass, Alessandro Pastore, Nathan A. Pennell, Charles M. Perou, Nicholas Petrelli, Olga Potapova, Janet S. Rader, Suresh Ramalingam, W. Kimryn Rathmell, Victor Reuter, Sheila M. Reynolds, Matthew Ringel, Jeffrey Roach, Lewis R. Roberts, A. Gordon Robertson, Sara Sadeghi, Charles Saller, Francisco Sanchez-Vega, Dirk Schadendorf, Jacqueline E. Schein, Heather K. Schmidt, Nikolaus Schultz, Raja Seethala, Yasin Senbabaoglu, Troy Shelton, Yan Shi, Juliann Shih, Ilya Shmulevich, Craig Shriver, Sabina Signoretti, Janae V. Simons, Samuel Singer, Payal Sipahimalani, Tara J. Skelly, Karen Smith-McCune, Nicholas D. Socci, Matthew G. Soloway, Anil K. Sood, Angela Tam, Donghui Tan, Roy Tarnuzzer, Nina Thiessen, R. Houston Thompson, Leigh B. Thorne, Ming Tsao, Christopher Umbricht, David J. Van Den Berg, Erwin G. Van Meir, Umadevi Veluvolu, Douglas Voet, Linghua Wang, Paul Weinberger, Daniel J. Weisenberger, Dennis Wigle, Matthew D. Wilkerson, Richard K. Wilson, Boris Winterhoff, Maciej Wiznerowicz, Tina Wong, Winghing Wong, Liu Xi, Christina Yau, Hailei Zhang, Hongxin Zhang & Jiashan ZhangContributionsWriting committee leads: Peter J. Campbell, Gad Getz, Jan O. Korbel, Joshua M. Stuart, Jennifer L. Jennings, Lincoln D. Stein. Head of project management: Jennifer L. Jennings. Sample collection: major contributions from Marc D. Perry, Hardeep K. Nahal-Bose; led by B. F. Francis Ouellette. Histopathology harmonization: major contribution from Constance H. Li; further contributions from Esther Rheinbay, G. Petur Nielsen, Dennis C. Sgroi, Chin-Lee Wu, William C. Faquin, Vikram Deshpande, Paul C. Boutros, Alexander J. Lazar, Katherine A. Hoadley; led by Lincoln D. Stein, David N. Louis. Uniform processing, somatic, germline variant calling: major contribution from L. Jonathan Dursi; further contributions from Christina K. Yung, Matthew H. Bailey, Gordon Saksena, Keiran M. Raine, Ivo Buchhalter, Kortine Kleinheinz, Matthias Schlesner, Junjun Zhang, Wenyi Wang, David A. Wheeler; led by Li Ding, Jared T. Simpson. Core alignment, variant calling by cloud computing: major contributions from Christina K. Yung, Brian D. O’Connor, Sergei Yakneen, Junjun Zhang; further contributions from Kyle Ellrott, Kortine Kleinheinz, Naoki Miyoshi, Keiran M. Raine, Adam P. Butler, Romina Royo, Gordon Saksena, Matthias Schlesner, Solomon I. Shorser, Miguel Vazquez. Integration, phasing, validation of germline variant callsets: major contributions from Tobias Rausch, Grace Tiao, Sebastian M. Waszak, Bernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Suyash Shringarpure, Dai-Ying Wu; further contributions from Sergei Yakneen, German M. Demidov, Olivier Delaneau, Shuto Hayashi, Seiya Imoto, Nina Habermann, Ayellet V. Segre, Erik Garrison, Andy Cafferkey, Eva G. Alvarez, José María Heredia-Genestar, Francesc Muyas, Oliver Drechsel, Alicia L. Bruzos, Javier Temes, Jorge Zamora, L. Jonathan Dursi, Adrian Baez-Ortega, Hyung-Lae Kim, Matthew H. Bailey, R. Jay Mashl, Kai Ye, Ivo Buchhalter, Anthony DiBiase, Kuan-lin Huang, Ivica Letunic, Michael D. McLellan, Steven J. Newhouse, Matthias Schlesner, Tal Shmaya, Sushant Kumar, David C. Wedge, Mark H. Wright, Venkata D. Yellapantula, Mark Gerstein, Ekta Khurana, Tomas Marques-Bonet, Arcadi Navarro, Carlos D. Bustamante, Jared T. Simpson, Li Ding, Reiner Siebert, Hidewaki Nakagawa, Douglas F. Easton; led by Stephan Ossowski, Jose M. C. Tubio, Gad Getz, Francisco M. De La Vega, Xavier Estivill, Jan O. Korbel. Validation, benchmarking, merging of somatic variant calls: major contribution from L. Jonathan Dursi; further contributions from David A. Wheeler, Christina K. Yung; led by Li Ding, Jared T. Simpson. Data and code availability: major contribution from Junjun Zhang; further contributions from Christina K. Yung, Sergei Yakneen, Denis Yuen, George L. Mihaiescu, Larsson Omberg; led by Vincent Ferretti. Pan-cancer burden of somatic mutations: major contribution from Junjun Zhang; led by Peter J. Campbell. Panorama of driver mutations in human cancer: led by Radhakrishnan Sabarinathan, Oriol Pich, Abel Gonzalez-Perez. PCAWG tumours with no apparent driver mutations: major contribution from Esther Rheinbay; further contributions from Amaro Taylor-Weiner, Radhakrishnan Sabarinathan; led by Peter J. Campbell, Gad Getz. Patterns, oncogenicity of kataegis, chromoplexy: major contributions from Matthew W. Fittall, Jonas Demeulemeester, Maxime Tarabichi; further contributions from Nicola D. Roberts, Peter J. Campbell, Jan O. Korbel; led by Peter Van Loo. Patterns, oncogenicity of chromothripsis: major contributions from Maxime Tarabichi, Jonas Demeulemeester, Matthew W. Fittall; further contributions from Isidro Cortes-Ciriano, Lara Urban, Peter J. Park, Peter J. Campbell, Jan O. Korbel; led by Peter Van Loo. Timing-clustered mutational processes during tumour evolution: major contributions from Jonas Demeulemeester, Maxime Tarabichi, Matthew W. Fittall; further contributions from Jan O. Korbel, Peter J. Campbell; led by Peter Van Loo. Germline effects on somatic mutation: major contributions from Sebastian M. Waszak, Bin Zhu, Bernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Esa Pitkanen, Tobias Rausch; further contributions from Yilong Li, Natalie Saini, Leszek J. Klimczak, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Nikos Sidiropoulos, Ludmil B. Alexandrov, Francesc Muyas, Raquel Rabionet, Georgia Escaramis, Adrian Baez-Ortega, Mattia Bosio, Aliaksei Z. Holik, Hana Susak, Eva G. Alvarez, Alicia L. Bruzos, Javier Temes, Aparna Prasad, Nina Habermann, Serap Erkek, Lara Urban, Claudia Calabrese, Benjamin Raeder, Eoghan Harrington, Simon Mayes, Daniel Turner, Sissel Juul, Steven A. Roberts, Lei Song, Roelof Koster, Lisa Mirabello, Xing Hua, Tomas J. Tanskanen, Marta Tojo, David C. Wedge, Jorge Zamora, Jieming Chen, Lauri A. Aaltonen, Gunnar Ratsch, Roland F. Schwarz, Atul J. Butte, Alvis Brazma, Peter J. Campbell, Stephen J. Chanock, Nilanjan Chatterjee, Oliver Stegle, Olivier Harismendy; led by G. Steven Bova, Dmitry A. Gordenin, Jose M. C. Tubio, Douglas F. Easton, Xavier Estivill, Jan O. Korbel. Replicative immortality: major contribution from David Haan; further contributions from Lina Sieverling, Lars Feuerbach; led by Lincoln D. Stein, Joshua M. Stuart. Ethical considerations of genomic cloud computing: led by Don Chalmers, Yann Joly, Bartha Knoppers, Fruzsina Molnar-Gabor, Jan O. Korbel, Mark Phillips, Adrian Thorogood, David Townend. Online resources for data access, visualization, exploration and analysis: major contributions from Mary Goldman, Junjun Zhang, Nuno A. Fonseca; further contributions from Qian Xiang, Brian Craft, Elena Pineiro-Yanez, Alfonso Munoz, Robert Petryszak, Anja Fullgrabe, Fatima Al-Shahrour, Maria Keays, David Haussler, John Weinstein, Wolfgang Huber, Alfonso Valencia, Irene Papatheodorou, Jingchun Zhu; led by Brian D. O’Connor, Lincoln D. Stein, Alvis Brazma, Vincent Ferretti, Miguel Vazquez. The 63-sample pilot-analysis validation process: major contribution from L. Jonathan Dursi; further contributions from Christina K. Yung, Matthew H. Bailey, Gordon Saksena, Keiran M. Raine, Ivo Buchhalter, Kortine Kleinheinz, Matthias Schlesner, Yu Fan, David Torrents, Matthias Bieg, Paul C. Boutros, Ken Chen, Zechen Chong, Kristian Cibulskis, Oliver Drechsel, Roland Eils, Robert S. Fulton, Josep Gelpi, Mark Gerstein, Santiago Gonzalez, Gad Getz, Ivo G. Gut, Faraz Hach, Michael Heinold, Taobo Hu, Vincent Huang, Barbara Hutter, Hyung-Lae Kim, Natalie Jager, Jongsun Jung, Sushant Kumar, Yogesh Kumar, Christopher Lalansingh, Ignaty Leshchiner, Ivica Letunic, Dimitri Livitz, Eric Z. Ma, Yosef Maruvka, R. Jay Mashl, Michael D. McLellan, Ana Milovanovic, Morten Muhlig Nielsen, Brian D. O’Connor, Stephan Ossowski, Nagarajan Paramasivam, Jakob Skou Pedersen, Marc D. Perry, Montserrat Puiggros, Romina Royo, Esther Rheinbay, S. Cenk Sahinalp, Iman Sarrafi, Chip Stewart, Miranda D. Stobbe, Grace Tiao, Jeremiah A. Wala, Jiayin Wang, Wenyi Wang, Sebastian M. Waszak, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Michael Wendl, Johannes Werner, Zhenggang Wu, Hong Xue, Sergei Yakneen, Takafumi N. Yamaguchi, Kai Ye, Venkata Yellapantula, Junjun Zhang, David A. Wheeler; led by Li Ding, Jared T. Simpson. Processing of validation data: major contributions from Christina K. Yung, Brian D. O’Connor, Sergei Yakneen, Junjun Zhang; further contributions from Kyle Ellrott, Kortine Kleinheinz, Naoki Miyoshi, Keiran M. Raine, Romina Royo, Gordon Saksena, Matthias Schlesner, Solomon I. Shorser, Miguel Vazquez, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Denis Yuen, Adam P. Butler, Brandi N. Davis-Dusenbery, Roland Eils, Vincent Ferretti, Robert L. Grossman, Olivier Harismendy, Youngwook Kim, Hidewaki Nakagawa, Steven J. Newhouse, David Torrents; led by Lincoln D. Stein. Whole-genome sequencing somatic variant calling: major contribution from Junjun Zhang; further contributions from Christina K. Yung, Solomon I. Shorser. Whole-genome alignment: Keiran M. Raine, Junjun Zhang, Brian D. O’Connor. DKFZ pipeline: Kortine Kleinheinz, Tobias Rausch, Jan O. Korbel, Ivo Buchhalter, Michael C. Heinold, Barbara Hutter, Natalie Jager, Nagarajan Paramasivam, Matthias Schlesner. EMBL pipeline: Joachim Weischenfeldt. Sanger pipeline: Keiran M. Raine, Jonathan Hinton, David R. Jones, Andrew Menzies, Lucy Stebbings, Adam P. Butler. Broad pipeline: Gordon Saksena, Dimitri Livitz, Esther Rheinbay, Julian M. Hess, Ignaty Leshchiner, Chip Stewart, Grace Tiao, Jeremiah A. Wala, Amaro Taylor-Weiner, Mara Rosenberg, Andrew J. Dunford, Manaswi Gupta, Marcin Imielinski, Matthew Meyerson, Rameen Beroukhim, Gad Getz. MuSE Pipeline: Yu Fan, Wenyi Wang. Consensus somatic SNV/indel annotation: Andrew Menzies, Matthias Schlesner, Juri Reimand, Priyanka Dhingra, Ekta Khurana. Somatic SNV, indel merging: major contribution from L. Jonathan Dursi; further contributions from Christina K. Yung, Matthew H. Bailey, Gordon Saksena, Keiran M. Raine, Ivo Buchhalter, Kortine Kleinheinz, Matthias Schlesner, Yu Fan, David Torrents, Matthias Bieg, Paul C. Boutros, Ken Chen, Zechen Chong, Kristian Cibulskis, Oliver Drechsel, Roland Eils, Robert S. Fulton, Josep L. Gelpi, Mark Gerstein, Santiago Gonzalez, Gad Getz, Ivo G. Gut, Faraz Hach, Michael Heinold, Taobo Hu, Vincent Huang, Barbara Hutter, Hyung-Lae Kim, Natalie Jager, Jongsun Jung, Sushant Kumar, Yogesh Kumar, Christopher Lalansingh, Ignaty Leshchiner, Ivica Letunic, Dimitri Livitz, Eric Z. Ma, Yosef Maruvka, R. Jay Mashl, Michael D. McLellan, Ana Milovanovic, Morten Muhlig Nielsen, Brian D. O’Connor, Stephan Ossowski, Nagarajan Paramasivam, Jakob Skou Pedersen, Marc D. Perry, Montserrat Puiggros, Romina Royo, Esther Rheinbay, S. Cenk Sahinalp, Iman Sarrafi, Chip Stewart, Miranda D. Stobbe, Grace Tiao, Jeremiah A. Wala, Jiayin Wang, Wenyi Wang, Sebastian M. Waszak, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Michael Wendl, Johannes Werner, Zhenggang Wu, Hong Xue, Sergei Yakneen, Takafumi N. Yamaguchi, Kai Ye, Venkata Yellapantula, Junjun Zhang, David A. Wheeler; major contributions from Li Ding, Jared T. Simpson. Somatic SV merging: Joachim Weischenfeldt, Francesco Favero, Yilong Li. Somatic CNA merging: Stefan Dentro, Jeff Wintersinger, Ignaty Leshchiner. Oxidative artefact filtration: Dimitri Livitz, Ignaty Leshchiner, Chip Stewart, Esther Rheinbay, Gordon Saksena, Gad Getz. Strand bias filtration: Matthias Bieg, Ivo Buchhalter, Johannes Werner, Matthias Schlesner. miniBAM generation: Jeremiah Wala, Gordon Saksena, Rameen Beroukhim, Gad Getz. Germline variant identification from whole-genome sequencing: major contributions from Tobias Rausch, Grace Tiao, Sebastian M. Waszak, Bernardo Rodriguez-Martin, Suyash Shringarpure, Dai-Ying Wu; further contributions from Sergei Yakneen, German M. Demidov, Olivier Delaneau, Shuto Hayashi, Seiya Imoto, Nina Habermann, Ayellet V. Segre, Erik Garrison, Andy Cafferkey, Eva G. Alvarez, Alicia L. Bruzos, Jorge Zamora, José María Heredia-Genestar, Francesc Muyas, Oliver Drechsel, L. Jonathan Dursi, Adrian Baez-Ortega, Hyung-Lae Kim, Matthew H. Bailey, R. Jay Mashl, Kai Ye, Ivo Buchhalter, Vasilisa Rudneva, Ji Wan Park, Eun Pyo Hong, Seong Gu Heo, Anthony DiBiase, Kuan-lin Huang, Ivica Letunic, Michael D. McLellan, Steven J. Newhouse, Matthias Schlesner, Tal Shmaya, Sushant Kumar, David C. Wedge, Mark H. Wright, Venkata D. Yellapantula, Mark Gerstein, Ekta Khurana, Tomas Marques-Bonet, Arcadi Navarro, Carlos D. Bustamante, Jared T. Simpson, Li Ding, Reiner Siebert, Hidewaki Nakagawa, Douglas F. Easton; led by Stephan Ossowski, Jose M. C. Tubio, Gad Getz, Francisco M. De La Vega, Xavier Estivill, Jan O. Korbel. RNA-sequencing analysis: major contributions from Nuno A. Fonseca, Andre Kahles, Kjong-Van Lehmann, Lara Urban, Cameron M. Soulette, Yuichi Shiraishi, Fenglin Liu, Yao He, Deniz Demircioglu, Natalie R. Davidson, Claudia Calabrese, Junjun Zhang, Marc D. Perry, Qian Xiang; further contributions from Liliana Greger, Siliang Li, Dongbing Liu, Stefan G. Stark, Fan Zhang, Samirkumar B. Amin, Peter Bailey, Aurelien Chateigner, Isidro Cortes-Ciriano, Brian Craft, Serap Erkek, Milana Frenkel-Morgenstern, Mary Goldman, Katherine A. Hoadley, Yong Hou, Matthew R. Huska, Ekta Khurana, Helena Kilpinen, Jan O. Korbel, Fabien C. Lamaze, Chang Li, Xiaobo Li, Xinyue Li, Xingmin Liu, Maximillian G. Marin, Julia Markowski, Tannistha Nandi, Morten Muhlig Nielsen, Akinyemi I. Ojesina, Qiang Pan-Hammarstrom, Peter J. Park, Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu, Jakob Pedersen, Reiner Siebert, Hong Su, Patrick Tan, Bin Tean Teh, Jian Wang, Sebastian M. Waszak, Heng Xiong, Sergei Yakneen, Chen Ye, Christina Yung, Xiuqing Zhang, Liangtao Zheng, Jingchun Zhu, Shida Zhu, Philip Awadalla, Chad J. Creighton, Matthew Meyerson, B. F. Francis Ouellette, Kui Wu, Huanming Yang; led by Jonathan Goke, Roland F. Schwarz, Oliver Stegle, Zemin Zhang, Alvis Brazma, Gunnar Ratsch, Angela N. Brooks. Clustering of tumour genomes based on telomere maintenance-related features: major contribution from David Haan; led by Lincoln D. Stein, Joshua M. Stuart. Clustered mutational processes in PCAWG: major contributions from Jonas Demeulemeester, Maxime Tarabichi, Matthew W. Fittall; led by Peter J. Campbell, Jan O. Korbel, Peter Van Loo. Tumours without detected driver mutations: Esther Rheinbay, Amaro Taylor-Weiner, Radhakrishnan Sabarinathan, Peter J. Campbell, Gad Getz. Panorama of driver mutations in human cancer: major contributions from Radhakrishnan Sabarinathan, Oriol Pich; further contributions from Inigo Martincorena, Carlota Rubio-Perez, Malene Juul, Jeremiah Wala, Steven Schumacher, Ofer Shapira, Nikos Sidiropoulos, Sebastian M. Waszak, David Tamborero, Loris Mularoni, Esther Rheinbay, Henrik Hornshoj, Jordi Deu-Pons, Ferran Muinos, Johanna Bertl, Qianyun Guo, Chad J. Creighton, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Jan O. Korbel, Gad Getz, Peter J. Campbell, Jakob Pedersen, Rameen Beroukhim; led by Abel Gonzalez-Perez. Pilot benchmarking, variant consensus development and validation: major contribution from L. Jonathan Dursi; further contributions from Christina K. Yung, Matthew H. Bailey, Gordon Saksena, Keiran M. Raine, Ivo Buchhalter, Kortine Kleinheinz, Matthias Schlesner, Yu Fan, David Torrents, Matthias Bieg, Paul C. Boutros, Ken Chen, Zechen Chong, Kristian Cibulskis, Oliver Drechsel, Roland Eils, Robert S. Fulton, Josep Gelpi, Mark Gerstein, Santiago Gonzalez, Gad Getz, Ivo G. Gut, Faraz Hach, Michael Heinold, Taobo Hu, Vincent Huang, Barbara Hutter, Hyung-Lae Kim, Natalie Jager, Jongsun Jung, Sushant Kumar, Yogesh Kumar, Christopher Lalansingh, Ignaty Leshchiner, Ivica Letunic, Dimitri Livitz, Eric Z. Ma, Yosef Maruvka, R. Jay Mashl, Michael D. McLellan, Ana Milovanovic, Morten Muhlig Nielsen, Brian D. O’Connor, Stephan Ossowski, Nagarajan Paramasivam, Jakob Skou Pedersen, Marc D. Perry, Montserrat Puiggros, Romina Royo, Esther Rheinbay, S. Cenk Sahinalp, Iman Sarrafi, Chip Stewart, Miranda D. Stobbe, Grace Tiao, Jeremiah A. Wala, Jiayin Wang, Wenyi Wang, Sebastian M. Waszak, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Michael Wendl, Johannes Werner, Zhenggang Wu, Hong Xue, Sergei Yakneen, Takafumi N. Yamaguchi, Kai Ye, Venkata Yellapantula, Junjun Zhang, David A. Wheeler; led by Li Ding, Jared T. Simpson. Production somatic variant calling on the PCAWG compute cloud: major contributions from Christina K. Yung, Brian D. O’Connor, Sergei Yakneen, Junjun Zhang; further contributions from Kyle Ellrott, Kortine Kleinheinz, Naoki Miyoshi, Keiran M. Raine, Romina Royo, Gordon Saksena, Matthias Schlesner, Solomon I. Shorser, Miguel Vazquez, Joachim Weischenfeldt, Denis Yuen, Adam P. Butler, Brandi N. Davis-Dusenbery, Roland Eils, Vincent Ferretti, Robert L. Grossman, Olivier Harismendy, Youngwook Kim, Hidewaki Nakagawa, Steven J Newhouse, David Torrents; led by Lincoln D. Stein. PCAWG data portals: major contributions from Mary Goldman, Junjun Zhang, Nuno A. Fonseca, Isidro Cortes-Ciriano; further contributions from Qian Xiang, Brian Craft, Elena Pineiro-Yanez, Brian D O’Connor, Wojciech Bazant, Elisabet Barrera, Alfonso Munoz, Robert Petryszak, Anja Fullgrabe, Fatima Al-Shahrour, Maria Keays, David Haussler, John Weinstein, Wolfgang Huber, Alfonso Valencia, Irene Papatheodorou, Jingchun Zhu; led by Vincent Ferretti, Miguel Vazquez.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Peter J. Campbell or Gad Getz or Jan O. Korbel or Joshua M. Stuart or Lincoln D. Stein.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
Gad Getz receives research funds from IBM and Pharmacyclics and is an inventor on patent applications related to MuTect, ABSOLUTE, MutSig, MSMuTect, MSMutSig and POLYSOLVER. Hikmat Al-Ahmadie is consultant for AstraZeneca and Bristol-Myers Squibb. Samuel Aparicio is a founder and shareholder of Contextual Genomics. Pratiti Bandopadhayay receives grant funding from Novartis for an unrelated project. Rameen Beroukhim owns equity in Ampressa Therapeutics. Andrew Biankin receives grant funding from Celgene, AstraZeneca and is a consultant for or on advisory boards of AstraZeneca, Celgene, Elstar Therapeutics, Clovis Oncology and Roche. Ewan Birney is a consultant for Oxford Nanopore, Dovetail and GSK. Marcus Bosenberg is a consultant for Eli Lilly. Atul Butte is a cofounder of and consultant for Personalis, NuMedii, a consultant for Samsung, Geisinger Health, Mango Tree Corporation, Regenstrief Institute and in the recent past a consultant for 10x Genomics and Helix, a shareholder in Personalis, a minor shareholder in Apple, Twitter, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Sarepta, 10x Genomics, Amazon, Biogen, CVS, Illumina, Snap and Sutro and has received honoraria and travel reimbursement for invited talks from Genentech, Roche, Pfizer, Optum, AbbVie and many academic institutions and health systems. Carlos Caldas has served on the Scientific Advisory Board of Illumina. Lorraine Chantrill acted on an advisory board for AMGEN Australia in the past 2 years. Andrew D. Cherniack receives research funding from Bayer. Helen Davies is an inventor on a number of patent applications that encompass the use of mutational signatures. Francisco De La Vega was employed at Annai Systems during part of the project. Ronny Drapkin serves on the scientific advisory board of Repare Therapeutics and Siamab Therapeutics. Rosalind Eeles has received an honorarium for the GU-ASCO meeting in San Francisco in January 2016 as a speaker, a honorarium and support from Janssen for the RMH FR meeting in November 2017 as a speaker (title: genetics and prostate cancer), a honorarium for an University of Chicago invited talk in May 2018 as speaker and an educational honorarium paid by Bayer & Ipsen to attend GU Connect ‘Treatment sequencing for mCRPC patients within the changing landscape of mHSPC’ at a venue at ESMO, Barcelona, on 28 September 2019. Paul Flicek is a member of the scientific advisory boards of Fabric Genomics and Eagle Genomics. Ronald Ghossein is a consultant for Veracyte. Dominik Glodzik is an inventor on a number of patent applications that encompass the use of mutational signatures. Eoghan Harrington is a full-time employee of Oxford Nanopore Technologies and is a stock holder. Yann Joly is responsible for the Data Access Compliance Office (DACO) of ICGC 2009-2018. Sissel Juul is a full-time employee of Oxford Nanopore Technologies and is a stock holder. Vincent Khoo has received personal fees and non-financial support from Accuray, Astellas, Bayer, Boston Scientific and Janssen. Stian Knappskog is a coprincipal investigator on a clinical trial that receives research funding from AstraZeneca and Pfizer. Ignaty Leshchiner is a consultant for PACT Pharma. Carlos López-Otín has ownership interest (including stock and patents) in DREAMgenics. Matthew Meyerson is a scientific advisory board chair of, and consultant for, OrigiMed, has obtained research funding from Bayer and Ono Pharma and receives patent royalties from LabCorp. Serena Nik-Zainal is an inventor on a number of patent applications that encompass the use of mutational signatures. Nathan Pennell has done consulting work with Merck, Astrazeneca, Eli Lilly and Bristol-Myers Squibb. Xose S. Puente has ownership interest (including stock and patents in DREAMgenics. Benjamin J. Raphael is a consultant for and has ownership interest (including stock and patents) in Medley Genomics. Jorge Reis-Filho is a consultant for Goldman Sachs and REPARE Therapeutics, member of the scientific advisory board of Volition RX and Paige.AI and an ad hoc member of the scientific advisory board of Ventana Medical Systems, Roche Tissue Diagnostics, InVicro, Roche, Genentech and Novartis. Lewis R. Roberts has received grant support from ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, Bayer, BTG International, Exact Sciences, Gilead Sciences, Glycotest, RedHill Biopharma, Target PharmaSolutions and Wako Diagnostics and has provided advisory services to Bayer, Exact Sciences, Gilead Sciences, GRAIL, QED Therapeutics and TAVEC Pharmaceuticals. Richard A. Scolyer has received fees for professional services from Merck Sharp & Dohme, GlaxoSmithKline Australia, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Dermpedia, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Australia, Myriad, NeraCare GmbH and Amgen. Tal Shmaya is employed at Annai Systems. Reiner Siebert has received speaker honoraria from Roche and AstraZeneca. Sabina Signoretti is a consultant for Bristol-Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Merck, AACR and NCI and has received funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Exelixis and royalties from Biogenex. Jared Simpson has received research funding and travel support from Oxford Nanopore Technologies. Anil K. Sood is a consultant for Merck and Kiyatec, has received research funding from M-Trap and is a shareholder in BioPath. Simon Tavaré is on the scientific advisory board of Ipsen and a consultant for Kallyope. John F. Thompson has received honoraria and travel support for attending advisory board meetings of GlaxoSmithKline and Provectus and has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for MSD Australia and BMS Australia. Daniel Turner is a full-time employee of Oxford Nanopore Technologies and is a stock holder. Naveen Vasudev has received speaker honoraria and/or consultancy fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, EUSA pharma, MSD and Novartis. Jeremiah A. Wala is a consultant for Nference. Daniel J. Weisenberger is a consultant for Zymo Research. Dai-Ying Wu is employed at Annai Systems. Cheng-Zhong Zhang is a cofounder and equity holder of Pillar Biosciences, a for-profit company that specializes in the development of targeted sequencing assays. The other authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information|Peer review information Nature thanks Arul Chinnaiyan, Ben Lehner, Nicolas Robine and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Extended data figures and tables|Extended Data Fig. 1 Flow-chart showing key steps in the analysis of PCAWG genomes.After alignment to the genome, somatic mutations were identified by three pipelines, with subsequent merging into a consensus variant set used for downstream scientific analyses. Subs, substitutions; DKFZ/EMBL, the German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ) and Europen Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL).Extended Data Fig. 2 Distribution of accuracy estimates across algorithms and samples from validation data.a, F1 accuracy, precision and sensitivity estimates for somatic SNVs across the core algorithms and different approaches to merging the call-sets. The box plots demarcate the interquartile range and median of estimates across the n = 50 samples in the validation dataset. b, F1 accuracy, precision and sensitivity estimates for somatic indels (n = 50 samples). SVM, support vector machine; union, calls made by all variant-calling algorithms; intersect2, calls made by any combination of two variant-calling algorithms; intersect3, calls made by any three variant-calling algorithms.Extended Data Fig. 3 Distribution of numbers of somatic mutations of different classes across tumour types.The y axis is on a log scale. The 2,583 donors with the highest quality metrics (white-listed donors) are plotted. SNVs indicate substitutions; indels are taken as insertions or deletions <100 bp in size; retrotranspositions are the combined counts of somatic retrotransposon insertions, transductions and somatic pseudogene insertions.Extended Data Fig. 4 Patients with no detected driver mutations in PCAWG.a, Number (red) of patients without detected driver mutations distributed across the different tumour types studied. b, Estimated sensitivity for detecting somatic point mutations genome-wide across tumour types (total sample size: n = 2,583 patients). Each point represents the estimate for a single patient, layered on violin plots that show the estimated density distribution of sensitivity values for that tumour type (the width proportional is to density). c, SETD2 expression levels across different medulloblastoma subtypes. Points represent individual patients, coloured by whether the gene exhibited focal copy number (CN) loss or a truncating point mutation, or was the wild-type gene. The coloured areas are violin plots showing the estimated density distribution of expression values for that medulloblastoma subtype.Extended Data Fig. 5 Examples of clustered mutational processes.a, Chromoplexy example in a thyroid adenocarcinoma. Genes at the breakpoints are schematically depicted in their normal genomic context and again in the reconstructed derivative chromosomes below. b, Distinct kataegis signatures in the genome of a pancreatic adenocarcinoma sample. SVs and their classification are shown above the main rainfall plot, as well as the total and minor allele copy number. Tra, translocation; del, deletion; dup, duplication; t2tInv, tail-to-tail inversion; h2hInv, head-to-head inversion. Magnifications of the three foci on chromosomes 1, 8 and 12, respectively, highlight distinct manifestations of kataegis. Left, a novel process similar to signature 17 with T > N mutations at CT or TT dinucleotides. Middle, the prototypical APOBEC3A/B type with C > T (signature 2) and/or C>G/A (signature 13) substitutions at TpC. Right, an alternative cytidine deaminase(s) with a preference for substitutions at C/GpC. Most of the SNVs in each of these foci can be phased to the same allele and no evidence of anti-phasing is observed. c, Example of a chromothripsis event in a melanoma. The black points (top) represent copy-number estimates from individual genomic bins, with SVs shown as coloured arcs (translocation in black, deletion in purple, duplication in brown, tail-to-tail inversion in cyan, head-to-head inversion in green) that mostly demarcate copy-number changes. The mate chromosomes are displayed above translocations. Bottom, the variant allele fractions of somatic mutations distributed along the relevant chromosomal region.Extended Data Fig. 6 Patterns of intense kataegis.a, Distribution of the tumour types (colour-coded as in Extended Data Fig. 3) of the samples in the top 5% of kataegis intensity in each of the four identified genome-wide patterns: non-APOBEC, replication stress, rearrangement-associated and the combination of the last two. b, c, Distribution of leading/lagging strand (b) and replication timing bias (c) for rearrangement-(in)dependent APOBEC kataegis, based on n = 2,583 tumours. P values were derived using a two-sided Mann–Whittney U-test. d, Example rainfall plots for each of the four identified kataegis patterns.Extended Data Fig. 7 Association of chromothripsis with covariates and driver events.a, Odds ratios per cancer type of containing chromothripsis in whole-genome duplicated versus diploid samples (n = 2,583 patients). ***q < 0.001; **q < 0.01; *q < 0.05. Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed using Fisher–Boschloo tests, corrected for multiple-hypothesis testing. b, Same as a for female versus male. c, Proportion of mutations explained by single-base substitution signature 1 and age at diagnosis in prostate cancer samples (n = 210 patients) with or without chromothripsis (q < 0.05). The early-onset prostate cancer project drives the signal and was sequenced at lower depth. For the box-and-whisker plots, the box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a horizontal line. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is less. Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed using Mann–Whitney U-tests. d, Counts of co-occurrence of chromothripsis with amplification (blue) and homozygous deletions (red) in driver regions: observed (thick line) versus randomized (shaded area and thin line). The cumulative number of drivers that were hit is plotted as a function of the number of times those drivers were hit. e, For each sample in which chromothripsis coincided with a driver event in those genes, we show the fold change in gene expression compared to the median expression of the gene in non-chromothripsis samples of the same cancer type, coloured by cancer type and shaped by the type of driver event. We show with added transparency the fold changes calculated the same way for samples with driver mutations hitting the same driver genes, but that had no evidence of chromothripsis. Analysis is based on n = 1,222 patients with RNA-sequencing data. f, Enrichment of co-occurrence of chromothripsis with driver events. The x axis shows the association of chromothripsis with a driver in a given cancer type compared with its rate of association with that driver in all other cancer types. The y axis shows the association of chromothripsis with a driver in a given cancer type compared with its rate of association with all other drivers in that type. Exact binomial tests are used and P values are corrected for multiple testing according to the Benjamini–Hochberg method.Extended Data Fig. 8 Further examples of chromothripsis-induced amplification targeting multiple cancer-associated genes simultaneously in melanoma.a, Examples of amplifications that occurred early in the development of melanoma. The black points (top) represent copy-number estimates from individual genomic bins, with SVs shown as coloured arcs (translocation in black, deletion in purple, duplication in brown, tail-to-tail inversion in cyan and head-to-head inversion in green) that mostly demarcate copy-number changes. Bottom, the variant allele fractions of SNVs distributed along the relevant chromosomal region. The paucity of somatic mutations at high variant allele fractions in the most-heavily amplified regions indicates that these amplifications began very early in tumour evolution, before the lineage had had opportunity to acquire many SNVs. b, Example of an amplification that occurred late in melanoma development. The large numbers of somatic mutations at high variant allele fractions in the most-heavily amplified regions indicate that these amplifications began late in tumour evolution, after the lineage had already acquired many SNVs.Extended Data Fig. 9 Timing the amplifications after chromothripsis in molecular time for 10 representative cases.a, Copy-number plot of chromothriptic regions categorized as ‘liposarc-like’ in five acral melanomas with CCND1 amplification. Segments indicate the copy number of the major allele. Points represent SNV multiplicities, that is, the estimated number of copies carrying each SNV, coloured by base change and shaped by strand. Small vertical arrows link SNVs to their corresponding copy-number segment. Kataegis foci are shown within black boxes and show typical strand specificities (all triangles or all circles), similar multiplicities and base changes of signatures 2 and 13 (red and black, respectively). A coloured bar (top right) represents the molecular timing of the amplification (red bar; high is early, low is late) and is coloured by the fraction of total SNVs assigned to the following timing categories: clonal [early], clonal mutations that occurred before duplications involving the relevant chromosome (including whole-genome duplications); clonal [late], clonal mutations that occurred after such duplications; and clonal [NA], mutations that occurred when no duplication was observed. b, Same as a in two cutaneous melanomas, one shows early amplification, the other late amplification. c, Same as a, b, for three lung squamous cell carcinomas and late amplification of SOX2.Extended Data Fig. 10 Association between common germline variants and endogenous mutational processes.Genome-wide association of somatic CpG mutagenesis in individuals of European ancestry (n = 1,201 patients) based on mutational signature analysis (a) and NpCpG motif analysis (b). Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed using PLINK v.1.9. To mitigate multiple-hypothesis testing, the significance threshold was set to genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10−8). c, d, Locuszoom plot for somatic APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis association results, linkage disequilibrium and recombination rates around the genome-wide significant 22q13.1 locus in individuals with European (c) and East Asian (d) ancestry (n = 1,201 and 318 patients, respectively). Locuszoom plot for somatic APOBEC3B-like mutagenesis association results around the 22q13.1 locus in individuals with European (e) and East Asian (f) ancestry after conditioning on rs12628403. g, h, Association between rs2142833 and expression of APOBEC3 genes in PCAWG tumour samples (adjusted for sex, age at diagnosis, histology and population structure in linear-regression models with two-sided hypothesis testing not corrected for multiple tests). For the box-and-whisker plot, the box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a horizontal line. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is less. Outliers are shown as points.Extended Data Fig. 11 Association between rare germline PTVs in protein-coding genes and somatic mutational phenotypes.a–d, f, Data are based on two-sided rare-variant association testing across n = 2,583 patients, with a stringent P value threshold of P < 2.5 × 10−6 used to mitigate multiple-hypothesis testing (significant genes marked with coloured circles). Blue/red circles mark genes that decrease/increase somatic mutation rates. The black line represents the identity line that would be followed if the observed P values followed the null expectation, with the shaded area showing the 95% confidence intervals. a, QQ plots for the proportion of somatic SV deletions, tandem duplications, inversions and translocation in cancer genomes. b, QQ plots for the proportion of somatic SV deletions in cancer genomes stratified by four size groups (1–10 kb, 10–100 kb, 100–1,000 kb and >1,000 kb). c, QQ plots for the proportion of somatic SV tandem duplications in cancer genomes stratified by four size groups (1–10 kb, 10–100 kb, 100–1,000 kb and >1,000 kb). d, QQ plot for the presence or absence of somatic SV templated insertion (cycles) in cancer genomes. e, Number of SV-templated insertion cycles in PCAWG tumours with germline BRCA1 PTVs. Only histological samples with at least one germline BRCA1 PTV carrier are shown (n = 1,095 patients combined). The box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a horizontal line. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is less. Outliers are shown as points. f, QQ plot for somatic CpG mutagenesis in cancer genomes based on NpCpG motif analysis. g, Violin plots show estimated densities of the proportion of somatic CpG mutations in PCAWG donors with germline MBD4 and BRCA2 PTVs. The box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a white point. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is less. Two-sided hypothesis testing, not corrected for multiple testing, was performed using linear regression models. h, Replication of germline MBD4 and BRCA2 PTV associations with somatic CpG mutagenesis in TCGA whole-exome sequencing donors. Violin plots show the estimated density of the proportion of somatic CpG mutations in TCGA exomes with germline MBD4 and BRCA2 PTVs. The box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a white point. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is less. Two-sided hypothesis testing, not corrected for multiple testing, was performed using linear-regression models. i, Correlation between MBD4 expression and somatic CpG mutagenesis in primary solid PCAWG tumours. Hypothesis testing was two-sided and not corrected for multiple testing, using linear-regression models. The box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a horizontal line. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is less. j, Data are mean ± s.e.m. across n = 20 tumour types. The dashed black line shows the fitted line to the data, estimated using linear-regression models. Hypothesis testing was two-sided and not corrected for multiple testing, using Spearman’s rank correlations. k, MBD4 effect sizes (open circles) with 95% confidence intervals (error bars) for individual cancer types were estimated using linear-regression analysis after (if available) accounting for sex, age at diagnosis (young/old) and ICGC project. Hypothesis testing was two-sided and not corrected for multiple testing.Extended Data Fig. 12 Germline MEI callset.a, Left, dots show the number of transductions promoted by each hot element in individual samples. Arrows highlight retrotransposition burst. Right, the contribution of each hot locus is represented. The total number of transductions mediated by each source element is shown on the right. b, Source L1 activity rate (that is, measured as the average number of transductions mediated by an element) versus the percentage of samples with retrotransposition activity in which the germline element is active. For visualization purposes, extreme points observed for a source L1 with an activity rate of 49 and for a L1 active in 31% of the samples are shown at ‘≥20’ and ‘≥10’, respectively. c, Contrasting allele frequencies for Strombolian and Plinian source loci (sample sizes shown under each axis label). The box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a white point. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is less. Hypothesis testing was performed using two-sided Mann–Whitney U-tests without correction for multiple tests. d, Numbers of active and hot source L1 elements per donor. Data are mean ± s.d. number of elements per donor. e, The novel Plinian source element on 7p12.3 mediates 72 transductions among only 6 cancer samples. This generates a transduction that induces the deletion of the tumour-suppressor gene CDKN2A. f, Violin plots show the estimated number of distinct germline MEI alleles per PCAWG donor. The box denotes the interquartile range, with the median marked as a white point. The whiskers extend as far as the range or 1.5× the interquartile range, whichever is less. Donors are grouped according to their genetic ancestry: AFR, African; AMR, admixed American; EAS, East Asian; EUR, European; SAS, South Asian. Sample sizes are shown under each axis label. g, For each type of MEI (L1, Alu and SVA) identified both in PCAWG and in the 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP), the correlations between allele frequency estimates per ancestry derived from both projects are displayed in a blue (0) to red (1) coloured gradient. n = 2,583 PCAWG patients. Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed using Spearman’s rank correlations without correction for multiple tests. h, Example correlation between MEI allele frequencies derived from PCAWG and the 1000 Genomes Project for individuals with European ancestry (n = 1,201 patients in PCAWG). Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed using Spearman’s rank correlations without correction for multiple tests. i, Evaluation of TraFiC-mem false-discovery rate on a liver hepatocellular carcinoma sample (DO50807) and a cell line (NCI-BL2087) sequenced using single-molecule sequencing with MinION (Oxford Nanopore). For each allele frequency bin (common, >5%; low frequency, 1–5%; rare, <1%), the percentage of events supported by N long reads is represented (N ranges from 0–1 to more than 5). MEIs supported by at least two Nanopore reads were considered to be true positives (blue palette) and were classified as false positives (red) otherwise. The total number of germline MEIs per allele frequency bin is shown on the right. j, Correlation between predicted MEI lengths from Illumina and Nanopore data. Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed using Spearman’s rank correlations without correction for multiple testing.Extended Data Fig. 13 Different mechanisms of telomere lengthening in cancer.a, Scatter plot showing the four clusters of tumour-specific telomere patterns identified across PCAWG samples, together with the clusters of matched normal samples, generated by t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding. Circles represent tumour samples and triangles represent matched normal samples. Points are coloured by tissue of origin. Data are based on n = 2,518 tumour samples and their matched normal samples. b, Patterns of comutation of the relevant driver mutations across individual patients. Columns in plot represent individual patients, coloured by type of abnormality observed. c, Distribution of clonality of driver mutations in genes relevant to telomere maintenance across clusters. Clonal [early], clonal mutations that occurred before duplications involving the relevant chromosome (including whole-genome duplications); clonal [late], clonal mutations that occurred after such duplications; and clonal [NA], mutations that occurred when no duplication was observed. d, Relationship between the estimated number of stem cell divisions per year and rate of telomere maintenance abnormalities across tumour types. The analysis uses data on estimated rates of stem cell division per year across n = 19 tissue types previously collated from the literature82. Tumour types are coloured according to the scheme shown in Extended Data Fig. 3. Two-sided hypothesis testing was performed using likelihood ratio tests on Poisson regression models with no correction for multiple tests.Extended Data Table 1 Overview of the tumour types included in PCAWG projectFull size tableExtended Data Table 2 Ethical considerations of genomic cloud computingFull size tableExtended Data Table 3 Scientific output using PCAWG data, in bite-size chunksFull size table
Supplementary information|
Supplementary InformationThis file contains Supplementary Figures 1-19, Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Notes 1-6.Reporting SummarySupplementary TablesThis zipped file contains Supplementary Tables 1-21 and a Supplementary Table Guide.This file contains the full list of consortium members and working groups.
Rights and permissions|
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the articleʼs Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the articleʼs Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleCampbell, P.J., Getz, G., Korbel, J.O. et al. Pan-cancer analysis of whole genomes.
                    Nature 578, 82–93 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-1969-6Download citationReceived: 29 July 2018Accepted: 11 December 2019Published: 05 February 2020Issue Date: 06 February 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-1969-6
Further reading|g





                  Chromosome Abnormalities: New Insights into Their Clinical Significance in Cancer
                


Fan Kou, Lei Wu, Xiubao Ren & Lili Yang

Molecular Therapy - Oncolytics
                (2020)
              




                  Non-BRAF Mutant Melanoma: Molecular Features and Therapeutical Implications
                


Irene Vanni, Enrica Teresa Tanda, Bruna Dalmasso, Lorenza Pastorino, Virginia Andreotti, William Bruno, Andrea Boutros, Francesco Spagnolo & Paola Ghiorzo

Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences
                (2020)
              




                  RET Gene Fusions in Malignancies of the Thyroid and Other Tissues
                


Massimo Santoro, Marialuisa Moccia, Giorgia Federico & Francesca Carlomagno

Genes
                (2020)
              




                  High-coverage whole-genome analysis of 1220 cancers reveals hundreds of genes deregulated by rearrangement-mediated cis-regulatory alterations
                


Yiqun Zhang, Fengju Chen, Nuno A. Fonseca, Yao He, Masashi Fujita, Hidewaki Nakagawa, Zemin Zhang, Alvis Brazma & Chad J. Creighton

Nature Communications
                (2020)
              




                  Genetics and Genomics of Breast Cancer: update and translational perspectives
                


Michela Biancolella, Barbara Testa, Leila Baghernajad Salehi, Maria Rosaria D’Apice & Giuseppe Novelli

Seminars in Cancer Biology
                (2020)
              




Comments|By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.
Abstract|Objective:
      
    

    
      To investigate the therapeutic effect of CBD-ointment administered on severe skin chronic diseases and/or on their outcome scars.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      A spontaneous, anecdotal, retrospective study of 20 patients with two most frequent skin disorders: psoriasis (n: 5 patients), atopic dermatitis (n: 5) and resulting outcome scars (n: 10). The subjects were instructed to administer topical CBD-enriched ointment to lesioned skin areas twice daily for three months treatment.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      Based on skin evaluations (hydration, TEWL, elasticity), clinical questionnaires (SCORAD, ADI, PASI), and supported by photographic data and investigators' clinical assessment, the results showed that topical treatment with CBD-enriched ointment significantly improved the skin parameters, the symptoms and also the PASI index score. No irritant or allergic reactions were documented during the period treatment.
    

    
  


        Conclusions:
      
    

    
      The topical administration of CBD ointment, without any THC, is a safe and effective non-invasive alternative for improve the quality of life in patients with some skin disorders, especially on inflammatory background.
Abstract|Objective:
      
    

    
      To evaluate trends by race in Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality obstetric-related quality and safety indicators and their relationships to trends in inpatient maternal and neonatal mortality.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      We used the Nationwide Inpatient Sample from 2000 through 2009 and calculated obstetric hospital quality and patient safety indicators and inpatient maternal and neonatal mortality stratified by race. We examined differences in age and comorbidity-adjusted trends in black compared with white women over time in the United States and by geographic region. Proportions were analyzed by χ2 and trends by regression analysis.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      Obstetric quality indicators varied by geographic region, but changes over time were consistent for both races. Cesarean deliveries increased similarly for black and white women, and vaginal births after cesarean delivery declined for both races but more rapidly for white women than for black women. Obstetric safety indicators improved over the study period for black and white women, with obstetric trauma decreasing significantly for both groups (28% compared with 35%, respectively) and birth trauma-injury to neonates declining for both, but changes were not significant. In striking contrast, inpatient maternal and neonatal mortality remained relatively constant during the study period, with persistently higher rates of both seen among black compared with white women (12.0 compared with 4.6 per 100,000 deliveries, P<.001 and 6.6 compared with 2.5 per 1,000 births, P<.001, respectively, in 2009).
    

    
  


        Conclusion:
      
    

    
      Improvements in Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality quality indicators for obstetrics are not reflected in improvements in maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality and do not explain continued racial disparities for outcomes in pregnancies in black and white women. Quality measures that are related to pregnancy outcomes are needed and these should elucidate obstetric health disparities.
Abstract|Background:
      
    

    
      Previous reports of lower triage acuity scores and longer Emergency Department (ED) wait times for African Americans compared to Caucasians had insufficient information to determine if this was due to bias or appropriately based on medical history and clinical presentation.
    

    
  


        Objective:
      
    

    
      (1) Determine if African Americans are assigned lower triage acuity scores (TAS) after adjusting for a number of demographic and clinical variables likely to affect triage scores. (2) Determine if lower TAS translate into clinically significant longer wait times to assignment to a treatment area.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      This was a retrospective matched cohort design analysis of de-identified data extracted from the ED electronic medical record system, which included demographic and clinical information, as well as TAS, and ED process times. Triage scores were assigned using a 5-point scale (ESI), with 1 being most urgent and 5 being least urgent. Mean TAS and wait times to a treatment area for specific chief complaints were compared by race; after adjusting for age, gender, insurance status, time of day, day of week, presence of co-morbidities, and abnormal vital signs using a 1:1 matched case analysis.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      The overall mean TAS for African Americans was 2.97 vs. 2.81 for Caucasians (difference of 0.18; p<0.001), translating to a lower acuity rating. African Americans had a significantly longer wait time to a treatment area compared to case-matched Caucasians (10.9min; p<0.001), with much larger differences in wait times noted within certain specific chief complaint categories.
    

    
  


        Conclusion:
      
    

    
      Our current study supports the hypothesis that racial bias may influence the triage process.
Abstract|Background:
      
    

    
      Versus whites, blacks with diabetes have poorer control of hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), higher systolic blood pressure (SBP), and higher low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol as well as higher rates of morbidity and microvascular complications.
    

    
  


        Objective:
      
    

    
      To examine whether several mutable risk factors were more strongly associated with poor control of multiple intermediate outcomes among blacks with diabetes than among similar whites.
    

    
  


        Design:
      
    

    
      Case-control study.
    

    
  


        Subjects:
      
    

    
      A total of 764 blacks and whites with diabetes receiving care within 8 managed care health plans.
    

    
  


        Measures:
      
    

    
      Cases were patients with poor control of at least 2 of 3 intermediate outcomes (HbA1c > or =8.0%, SBP > or =140 mmHg, LDL cholesterol > or =130 mg/dL) and controls were patients with good control of all 3 (HbA1c <8.0%, SBP <140 mmHg, LDL cholesterol <130 mg/dL). In multivariate analyses, we determined whether each of several potentially mutable risk factors, including depression, poor adherence to medications, low self-efficacy for reducing cardiovascular risk, and poor patient-provider communication, predicted case or control status.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      Among blacks but not whites, in multivariate analyses depression (odds ratio: 2.28; 95% confidence interval: 1.09-4.75) and having missed medication doses (odds ratio: 1.96; 95% confidence interval: 1.01-3.81) were associated with greater odds of being a case rather than a control. None of the other risk factors were associated for either blacks or whites.
    

    
  


        Conclusions:
      
    

    
      Depression and missing medication doses are more strongly associated with poor diabetes control among blacks than in whites. These 2 risk factors may represent important targets for patient-level interventions to address racial disparities in diabetes outcomes.
Abstract|Flexible transparent electrodes are in significant demand in applications including solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and touch panels. The combination of high optical transparency and high electrical conductivity, however, sets a stringent requirement on electrodes based on metallic materials. To obtain practical sheet resistances, the visible transmittance of the electrodes in previous studies is typically lower than the transparent substrates the electrode structures are built on, namely, the transmittance relative to the substrate is <100%. Here, we demonstrate a flexible dielectric-metal-dielectric-based electrode with ~88.4% absolute transmittance, even higher than the ~88.1% transmittance of the polymer substrate, which results in a relative transmittance of ~100.3%. This non-trivial performance is achieved by leveraging an optimized dielectric-metal-dielectric structure guided by analytical and quantitative principles described in this work, and is attributed to an ultra-thin and ultra-smooth copper-doped silver film with low optical loss and low sheet resistance.
Introduction|Transparent electrodes are widely used in photovoltaics (PVs)1,2, light-emitting diodes (LEDs)3,4,5, touch panels6,7, and other optoelectronic devices. Indium tin oxide (ITO) is the conventional selection for the transparent electrode because of its high visible transmittance and electrical conductivity. However, the low abundance of the indium element on earth is a limiting factor of this material. In addition, its applications in emerging flexible optoelectronic devices are significantly hindered by both the poor mechanical flexibility and the high annealing temperature needed to reduce its resistivity8. Graphene9,10, carbon nanotubes (CNTs)11,12, and conductive polymers13 have been investigated to replace ITO. Unfortunately, their limited conductivity and high cost of mass-production remains a challenge in large-area applications. To overcome these limitations, transparent electrodes employing metal networks have been proposed14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23. Although these novel structures exhibit decent optical and electrical performance and can also be scaled up easily via different roll-to-roll (R2R) techniques24,25, the extruded or non-uniform surfaces may cause shorting problems when being used in LED and PV devices14. In addition, the high optical haze resulting from the scattering of the nanowires and mesh patterns is undesired in high-resolution displays14. In recent years, dielectric–metal–dielectric (DMD)-based transparent electrodes have been noted as potential alternatives. In this type of electrode, a thin metallic film is sandwiched between two antireflection dielectrics to induce high transparency. They feature high transparency and conductivity, low haze, excellent flexibility, facile fabrication, and great compatibility with different substrates2,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37. The trade-off between electrical conductivity and optical transmittance has been a major challenge for metallic-material-based transparent electrodes. To achieve a practical conductivity (e.g., sheet resistance (Rs) < 20 Ω sq−1), the absolute visible transmittance of previously reported metallic-material-based transparent electrodes, including both metal network and DMD structures, is typically lower than that of the substrate itself, which has been taken for granted without serious questioning.Therefore, we are motivated to conduct a rigorous investigation and explore the limit of transmittance at a sufficiently low sheet resistance suitable for practical applications. In this work, we demonstrate a DMD-based transparent electrode with ~88.4% absolute transmittance averaged over the entire visible spectrum (400–700 nm) on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) polymeric substrate, which surpasses the transmittance of the substrate itself (~88.1%), leading to a relative transmittance >100%. This counter-intuitive, yet achievable performance is obtained by (i) quantitative design principles that are generalized in this work, particularly, analytic expression of the optimal bottom dielectric thickness and analytical result showing that different materials should be used for the two dielectrics, (ii) the use of an ultra-thin (~6.5 nm thick) and ultra-smooth (roughness < 1 nm) copper-doped silver (Cu-doped Ag) film providing low optical loss and high electrical conductivity at the same time. The proposed design principles and electrode structures have resolved the problems faced by other existing transparent electrodes and may have the potential to replace traditional ITO counterparts for flexible optoelectronics, thus facilitating high-performance flexible displays and optoelectronic devices.
Results|Strategy to achieve relative transmittance surpassing 100%Relative transmittance, Tr, is defined as the ratio of the absolute transmittance of the structure where a transparent substrate is coated with a metallic electrode, TD (see Fig. 1a), to the absolute transmittance of the bare substrate, TS (Fig. 1b):$$T_{\mathrm{r}} = \frac{{T_{\mathrm{D}}}}{{T_{\mathrm{S}}}} \approx \frac{{1 - \left( {R_1 + A} \right) - R_2}}{{1 - R_2 - R_2}}.$$
                    (1)
                where R1 is the reflection at the top side of DMD and A is the absorption of the metallic film, and R2 is the reflection at the substrate/air interface. For simplicity, the multiple round-trip reflections between the front and bottom surfaces of the substrate are ignored due to the negligible reflection intensity at both interfaces. Intuitively, Tr is thought to be smaller than 100% because a metallic electrode is usually reflective. However, in this section, we will provide guidelines built around the antireflection principles to reduce R1 and A using the DMD structure, and show that with optimized design (R1 + A) can be made smaller than the single side reflection of the substrate, R2, leading to relative transmittance surpassing 100%.Fig. 1: The definition of relative transmission. a Transparent substrate coated with a DMD structure. b Bare substrate.Full size imageAs shown in Fig. 2a, seven parameters (the refractive index, n2, and thickness, d2, of the transparent Dielectric 1, the refractive index, n3, extinction coefficient, κ3, and thickness, d3, of the metallic film, and the refractive index, n4, and thickness, d4, of the transparent Dielectric 2) should all be considered in order to optimize the transmittance over a broad spectrum in the visible, which makes it challenging to provide quantitative design guidelines33,34,35. Our design strategy is to maximize the transmittance for the condition where the metallic film is thick enough to achieve a practical sheet resistance; and thus, this strategy enables the synergistic combination of high optical transmittance and high electrical conductivity of DMD-based transparent electrodes.Fig. 2: Theoretical design of a DMD electrode.a Design parameters and reflection waves at various interfaces of a DMD transparent electrode. b Phasor diagram of reflection waves. c An ideal DMD and its parameters. d The calculated values of the left and right terms in Eq. (9) when using 24 nm TiO2 and 9 nm Ag as Dielectric 2 and the metallic layer, respectively, in the DMD structure, showing that Eq. (9) is well satisfied across the entire visible range. e Optimal averaged transmittance of the DMD electrode across the visible range (400–700 nm) dependent on the thickness of Dielectric 2. Here, TiO2 and 9 nm Ag are used as the bottom dielectric layer and the middle metallic layer, respectively. Each optimal transmittance value at a fixed TiO2 thickness is found out by sweeping the refractive index (n2) and the thickness (d2) of Dielectric 1.Full size imageAs a first step in the design process, a suitable material is selected for the sandwiched metallic layer by considering its (i) electrical conductivity; (ii) light absorption property in the visible range. Among all metals, silver (Ag), copper (Cu), and gold (Au) exhibit the lowest intrinsic electrical resistivity. The absorption of light by the metallic film in a DMD structure is expressed as$$A\left( {\lambda _0} \right) = \frac{{4\pi n_3\kappa _3}}{{\lambda _0}}\frac{{{\int}_0^{d_3} {\left| {E\left( z \right)} \right|^2{\mathrm{d}}z} }}{{\left| {E_0} \right|^2}},$$
                    (2)
                where E(z) is the electric field in the metallic film, E0 is the incident electric field and λ0 is the free-space wavelength. With a given thickness of the metallic layer, a metal with a small (nk) should be chosen for low absorption and high transmittance. Among Ag, Cu, and Au, Ag (n = 0.13 and k = 3.17 at 550 nm wavelength38) offers the lowest (nk) in the visible range, and is therefore, employed as the metallic layer in this study. Considering the small real part refractive index of Ag, n3 = 0 is reasonably assumed for the rest of this section for simplicity.In the next step, the thickness and the refractive index of Dielectric 2 are determined. To reduce the reflection loss at the top surface, the sum of two vectors shown in Fig. 2a should be designed to cancel r12, which is the complex reflection coefficient at the interface (1–2 interface) between the air (n1 = 1) and Dielectric 1 (\(r_{pq} = ( {\widetilde n_p{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{cos}}{\kern 1pt} \theta _p - \widetilde n_q{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{cos}}{\kern 1pt} \theta _q} )/( {\widetilde n_p{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{cos}}{\kern 1pt} \theta _p + \widetilde n_q{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{cos}}{\kern 1pt} \theta _q} )\) is the reflection coefficient at p–q interface for TE polarization where \(\widetilde n_{p(q)} = n_{p(q)} + {\mathrm{i}}\kappa _{p(q)}\) is the complex refractive index of layer p(q) and \(\theta _{p(q)}\) is the direction of wave propagation in the corresponding layer). The first vector is r23 with a phase shift acquired from the wave propagation in Dielectric 1. The second is r3,45 with a magnitude attenuation resulting from the propagation in the metallic film and with a phase shift due to the propagation in Dielectric 1. r3,45 is the total reflection coefficient at 3–4 interface (where the light reflected from the interface between 4 and 5 is taken into account), and can be expressed as$$r_{3,45} = \frac{{r_{34} + r_{45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_4d_4} \right)}}{{1 + r_{34}r_{45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_4d_4} \right)}}.$$
                    (3)
                In order to cancel out each other yielding R1 = 0, the trajectory of these three vectors should be a triangle or they should be aligned in the way as shown in Fig. 2b, therefore$$\left| {r_{3,45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }{\mathrm{i}}\kappa _3d_3} \right){\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| \ge \left| {r_{23}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| - \left| {r_{12}} \right|.$$
                    (4)
                Since n3 = 0 as we assumed,$$\left| {r_{23}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| = 1 > \left| {r_{12}} \right|,$$
                    (5)
                $$\left| {r_{23}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| = 1 > \left| {r_{3,45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }{\mathrm{i}}\kappa _3d_3} \right){\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{i}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right|,$$
                    (6)
                Thus, the right term in Eq. (4) represents the minimum value of the left term, which is achieved when the three vectors are aligned in the way as shown in Fig. 2b. In this case, we have$$\left| {r_{3,45}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }{\mathrm{i}}\kappa _3d_3} \right){\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| = \left| {r_{23}{\kern 1pt} {\mathrm{exp}}{\kern 1pt} \left( {2{\mathrm{{i}}}\frac{{2{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2} \right)} \right| - \left| {r_{12}} \right|,$$
                    (7)
                When the left term in Eq. (4) is smaller than this minimum value, the reflection cannot be completely suppressed.Since the left term in Eq. (4) decreases with increasing metallic film thickness (d3), |r3,45| should be designed to achieve its maximum value so that Eq. (4) can be satisfied for maximum metallic film thickness to achieve high electrical conductivity. To maximize |r3,45|, r34, and r45 should interfere constructively with each other so that$$\psi _{{\mathrm{prop}}} + \psi _{45} - \psi _{34} = 0,$$
                    (8)
                where ψ34 is the phase angle of r34, representing the phase shift due to the reflection at 3–4 interface, and ψ45 is the phase angle of r45, representing the reflection phase shift at 4–5 interface. n4 > n5 (shown later) gives ψ45 = 0. ψprop = 4πn4d4/λ is the propagation phase shift picked up when the wave is propagating in Dielectric 2. Then we get$$\psi _{34} = \frac{{4{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_4d_4.$$
                    (9)
                Since |r3,45| increases with n4 (see Supplementary Fig. 1), materials of high refractive index should be used as Dielectric 2 to achieve the maximum value of |r3,45| and its thickness can be calculated using Eq. (9). It is interesting to notice that \(\psi _{34} = {\mathrm{arctan}}{\kern 1pt} \left[ {2\kappa _3n_4/\left( {\kappa _3^2 - n_4^2} \right)} \right]\) decreases with wavelength due to the increase of κ3 with the wavelength for Ag, and the value of 4πn4d4/λ also decreases with the wavelength. Therefore, Eq. (9) can be potentially self-fulfilled over a broad spectrum, resulting in broadband high transmittance.Finally, the refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 are suitably selected for the optimal transmittance. The phasor diagram in Fig. 2b also gives$$\psi _{23} - \psi _{3,45} = {\mathrm{\pi }},$$
                    (10)
                $$\psi _{23} + \frac{{4{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2 - \psi _{12} = {\mathrm{\pi }}.$$
                    (11)
                Substituting ψ12 = π into Eq. (11) gives$$\psi _{23} + \frac{{4{\mathrm{\pi }}}}{\lambda }n_2d_2 = 0.$$
                    (12)
                4πn2d2/λ decreases with the wavelength and \(\psi _{23} = {\mathrm{arctan}}{\kern 1pt} \left[ {2\kappa _3n_2/\left( {\kappa _3^2 - n_2^2} \right)} \right]\) also decreases with the wavelength because κ3 increases with the wavelength for Ag. Unlike Eq. (9), Eq. (12) cannot be satisfied over a broad spectrum. Thus, to achieve broadband high transmittance, we need to sweep the refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 within a small range to find out the optimal value. Since the refractive index of typical dielectrics are between ~1.38 (magnesium fluoride, MgF2) and ~2.6 (titanium dioxide, TiO2), the required efforts are significantly reduced compared to the case where the refractive indices and thicknesses of all the three D–M–D layers need to be optimized.Now, we summarize the design procedure for highly transparent DMD electrodes. Step 1 (select n3, κ3, and d3): choose a low-loss and highly conductive metallic film for the DMD layer (in most cases, use Ag). The metallic film thickness is designed to achieve the electrical conductivity required in practical applications. It is worth noting that higher overall transmittance can be achieved by using a thinner metallic film. Step 2 (select n4): use high refractive index materials for Dielectric 2. The larger n4 is used, the higher overall transmittance can be obtained. Step 3 (determine d4): the thickness of Dielectric 2 is calculated using Eq. (9). Step 4 (design n2 and d2): optimize the refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 within a small range to achieve the optimal broadband transmittance.Proof of conceptFirst, we use the results for an ideal DMD structure at a single wavelength (Fig. 2c) reported in a previous study39 to verify the design guidance provided in Eqs. (9), (10), and (12). According to ref. 39, an ideal DMD can be achieved at a selected wavelength for n1 = n5 = 1, n3 = 0, n2 = n4 = κ3, and d2 = d4 = λ/(8κ3). Substituting n4 = κ3 into Eq. (9) gives d4 = λ/(8κ3), substituting n2 = κ3 into Eq. (12) gives d2 = λ/(8κ3), and substituting n4 = κ3 into Eq. (10) gives n2 = n4, all of which are perfectly consistent with the conclusions obtained in ref. 39.In realistic cases, the substrate cannot be air (i.e., n5 ≠ n1) and the refractive indices of common dielectrics are usually much smaller than the extinction coefficients of metals in the visible range (i.e., n4 « κ3). This implies that different materials are required for Dielectrics 1 and 2 in a realistic DMD structure targeting optimal broadband transparency, i.e., n2 ≠ n4. However, the same material was used for Dielectrics 1 and 2 in most of the previous studies (more than 70 published works28), which means those results are not optimal in terms of optical transmittance and indicates the necessity of providing quantitative guidelines in order to obtain optimized DMD electrode designs.Next, the optical performance of a DMD electrode on a common optical substrate, PET, is designed based on our proposed guidelines. The flexible PET substrate exhibits an averaged absolute transmittance of ~88.0% from 400 to 700 nm as shown in Supplementary Fig. 2. A 9-nm-thick Ag film is employed as the middle metallic layer and a TiO2 film with recorded-high n4 = 2.6 reported in ref. 27 is used for Dielectric 2. At the center wavelength of the visible range (i.e., 550 nm), ψ34 is calculated as 1.37, which leads to Dielectric 2 thickness d4 = 24 nm according to Eq. (9). As displayed in Fig. 2d, Eq. (9) is satisfied over the entire visible spectrum at d4 = 24 nm because both the left (ψ34) and right (4πn4d4/λ) terms of the equation decreases with the wavelength, which is consistent with our prediction in the above discussion. As summarized in Fig. 2e, a more straightforward way to find out the optimal d4 value at which the DMD structure presents the highest averaged transmittance in the visible range (400–700 nm) is to sweep d4 within a range (e.g., from 10 to 50 nm) and obtain the best transmittance at each d4 value by sweeping the refractive index (n2) and the thickness (d2) of Dielectric 1. As seen from the plot, the highest averaged absolute transmittance of ~89.8% is achieved at d4 = 24 nm, which agrees perfectly with the calculated results using Eq. (9) and thereby validates the accuracy of our proposed method. Correspondingly, the refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 are n2 = 1.7 and d2 = 63 nm, respectively, when the highest transmittance is achieved at d4 = 24 nm. The absolute transmittance and reflectance spectra of the optimized structure, i.e., PET substrate/24 nm TiO2/9 nm Ag/63 nm Dielectric 1, spanning the entire visible range is provided in Supplementary Fig. 3. This n2 can be realized by Al2O3 film fabricated using common deposition methods. The relative transmittance of the optimized DMD electrode Tr is ~102.0% compared to the simulated transmittance (~88.0%) of the PET substrate, which indicates that our proposed design procedure effectively guarantees the optimal optical performance of the DMD structure and a relative transmittance >100% is achievable with suitable material selection and structure design.Experimental demonstrationsBased on the previous analysis, high transparency can be achieved by suppressing the metal absorption loss with thin Ag films. However, large surface roughness is an unavoidable issue for physical-vapor-deposited (evaporated or sputtered) ultra-thin (<20 nm) Ag films due to Ag atom’s intrinsic three-dimensional (3D) Volmer–Weber growth mode40. As an example, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of an evaporated 15 nm Ag film can be as large as 6 nm41. Such an issue will affect the film conductivity and induce additional scattering loss, thereby impairing both electrical and optical performance of the DMD electrodes.We recently demonstrated a novel approach to achieve ultra-thin (down to 6 nm) and ultra-smooth (RMS roughness < 1 nm) Ag film by doping a metallic element (e.g., Aluminum, Copper, Titanium, or Chromium) during Ag deposition (as illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 4)2,5,29,42. In this work, we choose Cu-doped Ag as the metallic layer as this film offers the lowest optical loss among different doped Ag films5. The deposition rates of Cu and Ag were chosen as 0.19 and 11.09 Å s−1, respectively, which corresponds to ~2% Cu atomic concentration. The added Cu atoms effectively suppress the 3D island formation of the Ag atoms during film deposition and promote an early-stage formation of ultra-thin (<10 nm) Ag films. An atomic force microscopy (AFM) image showing details of a 6.5-nm-thick Cu-doped Ag film deposited on a fused silica substrate is displayed in Fig. 3a. The RMS roughness of the film is measured to be ~0.47 nm, which is more than 10 times lower than that of pure Ag at a similar thickness reported in previous works2,5,41. A 3D view of the AFM scan is further provided in Supplementary Fig. 5 to show the surface morphology and roughness of the ultrathin Cu-doped Ag film.Fig. 3: Characterizations of a Cu-doped Ag thin film.a Atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterizations of a Cu-doped Ag thin film. The scale bar is 100 nm. b Measured relative permittivity (ε = ε1 + iε2) values as a function of free-space wavelength of Cu-doped Ag and pure Ag. The shaded region refers to the visible range (400–700 nm), over which our DMD electrode is optimized.Full size imageAs a direct representation of the light absorption property of a film, the imaginary part (ε2) of the measured permittivity (ε = ε1 + iε2 = (n + iκ)2) of the 6.5-nm-thick Cu-doped Ag (Fig. 3b) is very close to that of pure Ag in the visible range (400–700 nm), which indicates the low optical loss of the ultrathin Cu-doped Ag film. Here, a 20 nm-thick pure Ag film was sputter-deposited for the calibration and the refractive indices of both Cu-doped Ag and pure Ag films were characterized using the spectroscopic ellipsometry. In addition, the sheet resistance of this thin Cu-doped Ag film was measured as ~18.6 Ω sq−1, showing the high conductivity of the ultrathin Cu-doped Ag film.Next, a DMD-based transparent electrode is constructed employing this 6.5-nm-thick Cu-doped Ag. Here, ~50-μm-thick PET film, which exhibits excellent mechanical flexibility, is used as the substrate. Zinc oxide (ZnO) is selected as Dielectric 2 due to its high refractive index (n ~ 2.0) and negligible optical loss in the visible range (ZnO is the highest refractive index material achievable in our group). The refractive indices of PET, ZnO, and Cu-doped Ag across the whole visible wavelength range are provided in Supplementary Fig. 6. The thickness (d4) of Dielectric 2 is calculated as ~24 nm with Eq. (9) considering n4 ~ 2.05 and ñ3 ~ 0.19 + 3.39i at 550 nm wavelength. As shown in Fig. 4a, the interesting compensation between the left (ψ34) and right (4πn4d4/λ) sides of Eq. (9) spanning 400–700 nm is also effectively verified in this case. Thus, 24 nm ZnO is an optimal selection not only for a single wavelength (550 nm) but also for the entire visible range. As the last step, the refractive index and the thickness of the top dielectric (Dielectric 1) is swept from 1.3 to 2.6 and from 1 to 100 nm with a step of 0.05 and 1 nm, respectively, to find out the optimal combination for the highest averaged absolute transmittance across the 400–700 nm wavelength range. Figure 4b shows that n2 = 1.65 and d2 = 56 nm for the optimal condition and this n2 is close to the refractive index of Al2O3. By applying the measured refractive index of Al2O3 (Supplementary Fig. 6), d2 was re-optimized and is still equal to 56 nm.Fig. 4: Experimental demonstration of the designed DMD electrode.a The calculated values of the left and right terms in Eq. (9) when using 24 nm ZnO and 6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag as Dielectric 2 and the metallic layer, respectively, in the DMD structure. It shows Eq. (9) is well satisfied across the entire visible range. b Averaged absolute visible transmittance (%) of the DMD electrode dependent on the refractive index and the thickness of the top dielectric (Dielectric 1) when Dielectric 2 and the metallic layer are selected as 24 nm ZnO and 6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag, respectively. c Calculated (red solid curve) and measured (blue dashed curve) absolute transmittance from 400 to 700 nm of the designed DMD transparent electrode, showing great consistency with each other. The representative measured spectrum with an averaged transmittance of ~88.4% is taken from the measurement results of 15 samples. As a comparison, one representative transmittance spectrum of the bare PET substrate with the averaged transmittance of ~88.1% is provided to show how the optical performance of the optimized DMD electrode gets improved. Inset presents the configuration of the designed DMD electrode, i.e., PET substrate/24 nm ZnO/6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag/56 nm Al2O3. d A photograph of the fabricated flexible electrode, showing high transparent and neutral appearance.Full size imageAs illustrated in the inset in Fig. 4c, the final configuration of the DMD transparent electrode is determined as PET substrate/24 nm ZnO/6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag/56 nm Al2O3. The measured and simulated optical spectra of the designed electrode are presented in Fig. 4c, showing great consistency with each other. The averaged absolute transmittances across 400–700 nm calculated from experimental and theoretical results are ~(88.4 ± 0.1)% and ~88.4%, respectively. Figure 4c clearly shows that the transmittance of the DMD electrode is higher than the absolute transmittance of the bare PET substrate (~(88.1 ± 0.4)% from the measurement) with the optical transmittance from 416 to 607 nm effectively enhanced with the two antireflection dielectrics. Here, the cited uncertainties above represent one standard deviation of the measured data. The experimental averaged transmittances of the DMD electrode and the PET substrate are calculated with the measurement results of 15 samples. Detailed data can be found in Supplementary Figs. 2 and 7. In contrast to all the results reported in previous works, the relative transmittance of our proposed DMD electrode surpasses 100% (Tr ~ 100.3% based on the measurement data) as its optical loss (~11.6%) resulting from the stack reflection and absorption (=100%−transmittance) is well suppressed below the ~11.9% optical loss of the bare PET substrate (Supplementary Fig. 2). The angular performance of the DMD electrode is further investigated in Supplementary Fig. 8, which shows that high transmittance >75% is maintained up to 60° angle of incidence. A photograph of the fabricated flexible DMD structure on the PET substrate is displayed in Fig. 4d, which clearly shows the high transparency.It is worthwhile noting that even higher transmittance can be achieved by using a bottom dielectric of higher refractive index than that of ZnO, such as TiO2 (whose refractive index is about 2.6 in the visible range27,43,44). In this case, the thickness of the high-index TiO2 layer is determined as d4 = 22 nm using Eq. (9). The refractive index and the thickness of Dielectric 1 are optimized as n2 = 1.6 and d2 = 72 nm, respectively, by sweeping n2 and d2 within a broad range. The optimal structure ‘PET substrate/22 nm TiO2/6.5 nm Cu-doped Ag/72 nm Dielectric 1’ gives out an averaged absolute transmittance of 89.6% across 400–700 nm, which corresponds to a relative transmittance of ~101.8% as presented in Supplementary Fig. 9.Finally, we discuss the functionality of our designed DMD electrode and other material options depending on the intended applications. Firstly, the use of the insulating Al2O3 layer will make the proposed DMD structure an excellent candidate for the transparent heat mirror28, that can be used for window defrosting or deicing applications. Secondly, to use the DMD structure as an electrode in optoelectronic devices, the Al2O3 layer can be replaced by other dielectric materials featuring a similar refractive index that can also function as an effective electron/hole transport layer. Possible candidates include ZnO sol–gel films1, which are commonly used as electron transport layers in solar cells and organic LEDs (OLEDs). Due to its porous structure, the refractive index is much lower than that of a dense ZnO film prepared by vacuum-deposition methods and is very close to the ideal refractive index (n2 = 1.65) required in our design (Supplementary Fig. 10). Notably, our proposed design principles are not limited to treating the ambient as air, in Supplementary Information we show that they are also applicable when designing a DMD electrode used in a solar cell, as an example of optoelectronic devices (see Supplementary Fig. 11 for more details). Thirdly, the dielectric layers (ZnO and Al2O3) also play a critical role in protecting the ultrathin metallic film from degradation. As presented in Supplementary Fig. 12, the DMD electrode on the PET substrate has survived the accelerated test under high temperature and humidity (85 °C, 85% relative humidity), showing ~12.6% change of the sheet resistance after 120 h test, while the sheet resistance of the ultrathin Cu-doped Ag without any protections increases quickly to infinity under the same test condition after 8 h.
Discussion|Relative transmittance higher than 100% was achieved in this work by the integration of a novel Cu-doped Ag film into an optimized DMD structure. This Cu-doped Ag film features ultra-thin thickness (~6.5 nm thick), ultra-smooth morphology (roughness < 1 nm), low optical loss, and high electrical conductivity (sheet resistance ~18.6 Ω sq−1), and was fabricated using a room-temperature deposition method. The optimized DMD structure was designed by quantitative principles that were generalized for the first time in this work. We experimentally demonstrated that the flexible DMD-based electrode, although not optimal, has 88.4% absolute averaged transmittance over the visible spectrum, which is higher than 88.1% transmittance of its PET substrate. This study provides an exciting pathway to address the major challenge faced by existing flexible transparent electrodes and to replace traditional ITO counterparts, thus facilitating high-performance flexible optoelectronic devices.
Methods|Film depositionMaterials used in this work were all deposited by sputtering (LAB 18, Kurt J. Lesker Co.). Cu-doped Ag films were deposited by DC co-sputtering from Cu and Ag targets with 4.5 mTorr argon (Ar) pressure. The optimized deposition rates of Cu and Ag were 0.19 and 11.09 Å s−1. Pure Ag was deposited by DC sputtering for 12.4 Å s−1 and 4.5 mTorr condition. ZnO and Al2O3 films were deposited by RF sputtering with 4.5 and 3.0 mTorr Ar pressure, respectively.Material and optical characterizationsAll optical simulations were performed using the transfer matrix method. The refractive indices and thicknesses of materials and transmission spectra of electrodes were measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry method (M-2000, J. A. Woollam Inc.). The reflection spectra of the fabricated electrodes were measured by a thin-film measurement instrument (F20, Filmetrics) integrated with a spectrometer and light source. The sheet resistances were measured using a four-point probe method (FPP-5000, Miller Design & Equipment). The surface morphology of Cu-doped Ag films was characterized by tapping mode atomic force microscopy (Dimension Icon AFM, Bruker Corporation).
Data availability|
The data that supports the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The source data underlying Supplementary Figs. 2 and 7 are provided as a Source Data file.

Code availability|
Transfer matrix method codes used for optical simulations are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Acknowledgements|D.L. acknowledges the support by the Basic Science Center Program for Ordered Energy Conversion of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51888103), NSFC (Grant No. 51976090), and Fundamental Research Funds of the Central Universities (No. 30919011403). C.J. and L.J.G. acknowledges the MTRAC Advanced Materials Hub 2018 Award. C.Z. would like to acknowledge the start-up funding from Huazhong University of Science and Technology. C.J. acknowledges helpful discussions with Mr. Kaito Yamada, Mr. Zhong Zhang, and Dr. Heyan Wang.
Author information|Author notesThese authors contributed equally: Chengang Ji, Dong Liu.AffiliationsDepartment of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, 1301 Beal Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USAChengang Ji & L. Jay GuoMIIT Key Laboratory of Thermal Control of Electronic Equipment, School of Energy and Power Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 200 Xiaolingwei Street, 210094, Nanjing, ChinaDong LiuSchool of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1037 Luoyu Road, 430074, Wuhan, ChinaCheng ZhangWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1037 Luoyu Road, 430074, Wuhan, ChinaCheng ZhangAuthorsChengang JiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarDong LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarCheng ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarL. Jay GuoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsC.J., D.L., and L.J.G. conceived the project. C.J. and D.L. are responsible for theoretical design and simulation. C.J. and C.Z. performed the experimental work. D.L. and L.J.G. directed the project. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to
                Dong Liu or L. Jay Guo.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
C.Z. and L.J.G. declare financial interest in the ultra-thin metal-based transparent conductor technology.

Additional information|Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Jean Christian Bernède, Andrew Proudian and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information|
Supplementary InformationPeer Review File
Source data|
Source Data
Rights and permissions|
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleJi, C., Liu, D., Zhang, C. et al. Ultrathin-metal-film-based transparent electrodes with relative transmittance surpassing 100%.
                    Nat Commun 11, 3367 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17107-6Download citationReceived: 18 January 2020Accepted: 26 May 2020Published: 06 July 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17107-6
Comments|By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.
Abstract|Purpose:
      
    

    
      Health providers' implicit racial bias negatively affects communication and patient reactions to many medical interactions. However, its effects on racially discordant oncology interactions are largely unknown. Thus, we examined whether oncologist implicit racial bias has similar effects in oncology interactions. We further investigated whether oncologist implicit bias negatively affects patients' perceptions of recommended treatments (i.e., degree of confidence, expected difficulty). We predicted oncologist implicit bias would negatively affect communication, patient reactions to interactions, and, indirectly, patient perceptions of recommended treatments.
    

    
  


        Methods:
      
    

    
      Participants were 18 non-black medical oncologists and 112 black patients. Oncologists completed an implicit racial bias measure several weeks before video-recorded treatment discussions with new patients. Observers rated oncologist communication and recorded interaction length of time and amount of time oncologists and patients spoke. Following interactions, patients answered questions about oncologists' patient-centeredness and difficulty remembering contents of the interaction, distress, trust, and treatment perceptions.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      As predicted, oncologists higher in implicit racial bias had shorter interactions, and patients and observers rated these oncologists' communication as less patient-centered and supportive. Higher implicit bias also was associated with more patient difficulty remembering contents of the interaction. In addition, oncologist implicit bias indirectly predicted less patient confidence in recommended treatments, and greater perceived difficulty completing them, through its impact on oncologists' communication (as rated by both patients and observers).
    

    
  


        Conclusion:
      
    

    
      Oncologist implicit racial bias is negatively associated with oncologist communication, patients' reactions to racially discordant oncology interactions, and patient perceptions of recommended treatments. These perceptions could subsequently directly affect patient-treatment decisions. Thus, implicit racial bias is a likely source of racial treatment disparities and must be addressed in oncology training and practice.
Abstract|Objective:
      
    

    
      To determine the household and community characteristics most closely associated with variation in COVID-19 incidence on American Indian reservations in the lower 48 states.
    

    
  


        Design:
      
    

    
      Multivariate analysis with population weights.
    

    
  


        Setting:
      
    

    
      Two hundred eighty-seven American Indian Reservations and tribal homelands (in Oklahoma) and, as of April 10, 2020, 861 COVID-19 cases on these reservation lands.
    

    
  


        Main outcome measures:
      
    

    
      The relationship between rate per 1000 individuals of publicly reported COVID-19 cases at the tribal reservation and/or community level and average household characteristics from the 2018 5-Year American Community Survey records.
    

    
  


        Results:
      
    

    
      By April 10, 2020, in regression analysis, COVID-19 cases were more likely by the proportion of homes lacking indoor plumbing (10.83, P = .001) and were less likely according to the percentage of reservation households that were English-only (-2.43, P = .03). Household overcrowding measures were not statistically significant in this analysis (-6.40, P = .326).
    

    
  


        Conclusions:
      
    

    
      Failure to account for the lack of complete indoor plumbing and access to potable water in a pandemic may be an important determinant of the increased incidence of COVID-19 cases. Access to relevant information that is communicated in the language spoken by many reservation residents may play a key role in the spread of COVID-19 in some tribal communities. Household overcrowding does not appear to be associated with COVID-19 infections in our data at the current time. Previous studies have identified household plumbing and overcrowding, and language, as potential pandemic and disease infection risk factors. These risk factors persist. Funding investments in tribal public health and household infrastructure, as delineated in treaties and other agreements, are necessary to protect American Indian communities.
Abstract|With the ever-increasing availability of whole-genome sequences, machine-learning approaches can be used as an alternative to traditional alignment-based methods for identifying new antimicrobial-resistance genes. Such approaches are especially helpful when pathogens cannot be cultured in the lab. In previous work, we proposed a game-theory-based feature evaluation algorithm. When using the protein characteristics identified by this algorithm, called ‘features’ in machine learning, our model accurately identified antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genes in Gram-negative bacteria. Here we extend our study to Gram-positive bacteria showing that coupling game-theory-identified features with machine learning achieved classification accuracies between 87% and 90% for genes encoding resistance to the antibiotics bacitracin and vancomycin. Importantly, we present a standalone software tool that implements the game-theory algorithm and machine-learning model used in these studies.
Introduction|Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) refers to a property of bacteria when they become less susceptible to an antimicrobial agent1,2,3,4. Bacteria can gain AMR by overexpressing or duplicating available genes, undergoing chromosomal mutation, or obtaining resistance genes from other bacteria by means of horizontal gene transfer1, 5. According to a recently released report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), at least 2.8 million people in the United States are infected every year by antimicrobial-resistant organisms, and these infections result in more than 35,000 deaths6. Also, according to a recently released report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2.4 million deaths are predicted in Europe, North America, and Australia in the next 30 years due to antimicrobial-resistant infections, and such infections could cause up to US$3.5 billion in additional health care costs per year7, 8. As AMR becomes a threat worldwide, both economically and to public health9,10,11,12,13, there is an urgent need to develop a preclinical tool for efficient prediction of AMR.One conventional strategy for identifying genetically-encoded mechanisms for AMR involves sequence assembly14,15,16,17 and read-based techniques18,19,20 that map sequence data directly to reference databases. Although these methods perform well for known and highly conserved AMR genes, they may produce an unacceptable number of false positives (genes predicted to encode resistance when they do not) for highly dissimilar sequences as was demonstrated previously for Gram-negative bacteria21. Machine-learning techniques can be applied as an alternative solution for predicting putative AMR genes. Rather than using sequence similarity, a machine-learning model detects features, i.e., characteristics of a protein sequence, that are unique to AMR genes. Several machine-learning methods have been proposed to identify novel AMR genes from metagenomic and pan-genome data12, 22, 23, but these methods used a small number of genetic features for predictions. Moreover, these approaches did not use a feature-selection strategy to remove irrelevant and redundant features that might compromise the accuracy of a machine-learning model.We recently introduced a game-theory-based feature selection approach (“game theoretic dynamic weighting based feature evaluation”, or GTDWFE) predicated on the supposition that a single feature might provide limited predictive value, but that it might contribute to form a strong coalition when used with other features21. We applied our feature selection approach in Gram-negative bacteria and obtained prediction accuracies ranging from 93% to 99% for prediction of genes that encode resistance to acetyltransferase (aac), \(\beta \)-lactamase (bla), and dihydrofolate reductase (dfr). In our current study, we test the GTDWFE algorithm with data from Gram-positive bacteria. We then combine the results for both studies and introduce “Prediction of Antimicrobial Resistance via Game Theory” (PARGT), a software program with a graphical-user interface (GUI) that is designed to identify antimicrobial-resistance genes for both Gram-positive and -negative bacteria.A major objective was to develop a software tool with a simple and intuitive GUI that is capable of extracting protein features without the need for manual curation and then use these features to identify putative AMR genes. PARGT integrates all of the tools and scripts required to identify protein features and to automatically generate feature subsets obtained via the GTDWFE algorithm. PARGT can be used with the Windows, Linux, or macOS, operating systems, and it provides options for predicting bac and van resistance genes in any Gram-positive bacteria and aac, bla, and dfr resistance genes in any Gram-negative bacteria. Users can test a single sequence or an entire genome for these genes. In addition, PARGT allows users to add newly confirmed AMR or non-AMR sequences to the training set as well as to reset the training data back to the original training set downloaded with the tool.
Results|Validation of PARGTWe validated the GTDWFE algorithm for feature selection as implemented previously21. In our earlier work, we considered the AMR (positive) and non-AMR (negative) amino-acid sequences of aac, bla, and dfr for Acinetobacter, Klebsiella, Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Escherichia as training datasets and tested our trained support vector machine (SVM)24, 25 machine-learning model with sequences from Pseudomonas, Vibrio, and Enterobacter. The combination of GTDWFE and SVM resulted in correct classification rates of 93%, 99%, and 97% for aac, bla, and dfr, respectively. This demonstrated that our approach was promising and that the GTDWFE algorithm is capable of identifying the most relevant, non-redundant, and interdependent features necessary for accurate prediction.In this paper we consider validation of our GTDWFE model for AMR proteins in Gram-positive bacteria. We use the unique AMR and non-AMR sequences available for bac and van from the Gram-positive bacteria Clostridium spp. and Enterococcus spp. as the training datasets for our SVM model. These training datasets are used to generate the best feature subsets by means of the GTDWFE approach. The training datasets contain 25 and 52 AMR (positive) examples for bac and van, respectively. A total of 52 non-AMR examples are considered as negative samples for each of the training datasets. In the GTDWFE approach, we select features based on the relevance, non-redundancy, and interdependency values of all features. For this analysis, we need to set an interdependent group size \(\delta \) to measure the interdependency between features, where \(\delta \) is used in the computation of the Banzhaf power index26 and indicates the size of each feature group. We selected a value of \(\delta =3\) based on previous work21 where we found that an interdependent group size of 3 was sufficient to identify best feature subsets from training datasets. We then test our trained model with known AMR and non-AMR samples from Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria. The test datasets contain 6 and 9 AMR (positive) sequences for bac and van, respectively, and 14 non-AMR (negative) sequences are used for each test dataset.Table 1 Predicted bac AMR sequences for Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria using the GTDWFE algorithm.Full size table
Table 2 Predicted van AMR sequences for Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria using the GTDWFE algorithm.Full size table
Tables 1 and 2 list the predicted bac and van AMR sequences from our test datasets, respectively. In each table, we provide the NCBI accession number27 for each protein sequence together with its name, and we note whether an AMR protein was correctly classified as AMR (true positive) or a non-AMR sequence was incorrectly classified as AMR (false positive). The GTDWFE algorithm successfully identified all six bac AMR genes (true positives). However, it missclassified 2 of the 14 non-AMR sequences as AMR (false positives). Therefore, the number of true positives, true negatives (negatives accurately classified), false positives, and false negatives (positives classified as negatives) for bac are 6, 12, 2, and 0, respectively, and the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for bac are 100%, 86%, and 90%, respectively. As shown in Table 2 for van, 8 of 9 AMR sequences were correctly classified as AMR (true positives) whereas 2 of 14 non-AMR sequences were classified as AMR (false positives). Therefore, the number of true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives for van are 8, 12, 2, and 1, respectively, and the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for van are 89%, 86%, and 87%, respectively. Note that the two tables contain one hypothetical protein and one putative uncharacterized protein. We have categorized these two proteins as false positives because they were identified as essential (non-AMR) genes in the Pathosystems Resource Integration Center (PATRIC)28, 29. However, it is quite possible that PARGT correctly identified them as AMR proteins given the number of annotation errors in public databases30. CDC71755 is from a Staphylococcus organism identified from a metagenome sequence, and EUJ19660 is from a Listeria aquatica organism obtained from an environmental water sample.Performance comparison with BLASTp and Kalign toolsWe also compared the performance of our GTDWFE algorithm with BLASTp (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins) and Kalign31 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/kalign/) results using default parameter settings. The outcomes shown in Supplementary Table S1 are the percent identities for bac AMR and non-AMR samples from Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria with respect to the bac AMR samples of Clostridium and Enterococcus. A percent identity for BLASTp and Kalign as low as 38.13% and 46.19%, respectively, are needed to identify all the bac AMR sequences; however, these low percent identities lead to 6 and 3 of 14 false positives for BLASTp and Kalign, respectively, in which non-AMR sequences are miscategorized. Therefore, the low percent identities for BLASTp and Kalign required to identify all AMR sequences increase the number of false positives for a set of diverse AMR sequences. In Supplementary Table S2 we show that the performances of BLASTp and Kalign when identifying van AMR sequences are actually better than that of the GTDWFE algorithm. This is due to the very high similarity (>98.5% identity) between the training AMR and test AMR datasets for van. When training and test sets share high similarity, BLASTp and Kalign are guaranteed to give good results. However, as in the case of bac for which the training and test AMR data similarity ranges between 38.13% and 41.01%, BLASTp does not perform well. For Kalign, the similarity ranges between 46.19% and 49.17% so that it performs better than BLASTp. However, the GTDWFE algorithm will outperform both BLASTp and Kalign because it does not use sequence similarity but rather protein features for prediction. BLASTp and Kalign do not predict; they match sequence similarity.
Discussion|In this work, we implemented a software package PARGT and extended our earlier work of identifying AMR genes in Gram-negative to Gram-positive bacteria. PARGT integrates the required software tools and scripts needed to generate all protein features automatically, and it performs predictions on user-inputted sequences. Moreover, users can update PARGT by including their own known AMR and non-AMR sequences to train the machine-learning model to potentially improve prediction accuracy. As our previous work described the experimental results for Gram-negative bacteria, in this paper we only included prediction results for Gram-positive bacteria. Simulation results showed that PARGT can predict AMR sequences for Gram-positive bacteria with accuracy ranging from 87% to 90%. PARGT gave better results for bac due to the diversity of sequences available, but BLASTp and Kalign exhibited better performance in the case of van because of the high similarity of sequences. To generate evolutionary and secondary structure features, we used the Uniprot database (containing 538,585 FASTA sequences) as our reference database for relatively fast execution; however, more accurate values for these features can be obtained using large-scale protein databases such as UniRef90 or UniRef100 (http://www.uniprot.org/help/uniref) as target/reference databases. Note, however, that there is a trade-off between accuracy and computational time when using a large-scale reference database to generate features. A parallel version of PARGT would reduce the execution time of the tool for and ameliorate the use of large-scale reference databases.
Methods|GTDWFE algorithm for feature selectionFeature collection, feature extraction, calculation of feature values, and feature selection using the GTDWFE algorithm are explained in detail in previous works21, 32. Briefly, a total of 621D candidate features were collected by means of a thorough literature search, where D stands for dimension (some features are single values, i.e., 1D, while others are vector values, e.g., 20D for the 20 different amino acids). We extracted all 621D features from both our positive (AMR) and negative (non-AMR) datasets and calculated their values. The GTDWFE algorithm was then used to select features for use in our machine-learning model. The GTDWFE selects the best feature at each iteration based on the relevance, non-redundancy, and interdependency values of all features. Initially, the weights of all features are the same i.e., 1. The relevance of a feature to the target class (AMR or non-AMR) and the distance of the feature to other features are calculated using Pearson’s correlation coefficient and the Tanimoto coefficient, respectively. These calculations are performed for all features, and the feature with the highest summation of relevance and distance is chosen as the initial selected feature. The Banzhaf power index26 is then calculated to estimate the interdependency between the selected feature and the remaining features. We measure the contribution of each feature when it forms a group with other features, and the conditional mutual information is calculated to find the Banzhaf power index of the features. The weight of each remaining feature is updated by adding the product of the current weight and the Banzhaf power index to the feature selected previously. In other words, at each step, we readjust the weight of the remaining features dynamically based on the features selected in earlier steps. Thus, the weight of a candidate feature actually corresponds to the interdependence values with the earlier selected features. The feature with the highest summation of relevance and distance values multiplied by the revised weight is chosen as the next selected feature. This process is repeated until the desired number of features has been reached.Machine-learning algorithmAfter identifying the best feature subset for use with our classifier by means of the GTDWFE algorithm, we trained an SVM machine-learning model using this feature subset. This binary classifier was then used for prediction. As was true for our previous work, in PARGT we tuned the SVM using the training datasets and chose the best SVM model to predict the AMR proteins in the test sequences. We considered 10-fold cross validation to tune the SVM model. The SVM model with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel and a cost value of 4 was identified as the best model for both bac and van training datasets. For the SVM, the RBF is used as a function in the kernel trick to implicitly transform the original space of the data to a high-dimensional space to make the data samples linearly separable, and the cost parameter is used to regulate the classification error.Figure 1The components of PARGT. Components outlined by dotted lines indicate additional training samples supplied by a user.Full size image
Overview of PARGT softwarePARGT is an open-source software package designed and implemented for predicting antimicrobial resistance genes in bacteria. PARGT is written using both Python 3 and R. R scripts were written to identify physicochemical and secondary structure features and for machine-learning modeling, and Python 3 was used to run the R scripts, to generate position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) features, and to implement the GUI. PARGT weight the importance of protein features based on their contributions during classification. All the required bioinformatics tools33,34,35,36,37,38,39 and scripts necessary to generate the protein features required in our machine-learning model are included in PARGT. PARGT uses the best feature subset identified by our GTDWFE algorithm to make predictions. It allows users to add new AMR and non-AMR sequences to the training datasets, and the software automatically updates the machine-learning model with the additional sequences, potentially resulting in an increase in the accuracy of the model. To minimize execution time, PARGT uses the UniProt database containing 538,585 protein sequences as a reference database, rather than a larger database, for generating PSSM and secondary structure features.Architecture of PARGTFigures 1 and 2 depict the architecture and GUI for PARGT, respectively. PARGT allows a user to input a set of known AMR and non-AMR sequences to use in the training dataset, generating all required feature values for these sequences automatically. As shown in Fig. 1, the 20D amino acid composition feature vector, 168D feature vector based on the composition, transition and distribution (CTD) model40, 41, 400D feature vector based on the PSSM, and 33D feature vector based on the secondary structure sequence and secondary structure probability matrix are generated from the input protein sequences. Then the best feature subset is constructed using our GTDWFE feature selection algorithm. An SVM is used as the machine-learning model that is trained using the selected feature set. Recall that the SVM model used for PARGT is automatically tuned during the training phase. Finally, the trained SVM model is applied to predict AMR sequences from the test dataset.As shown in Fig. 2, PARGT provides the option of predicting aac, bla, and dfr resistance genes for Gram-negative bacteria and bac and van resistance genes for Gram-positive bacteria. A user must select the appropriate option for predicting AMR from the GUI menu and also supply the test file for the set of protein sequences in FASTA format that they wish to have classified as AMR or non-AMR. PARGT automatically computes all the required feature values for the test sequences, and it provides an output file containing the set of predicted AMR sequences for the user’s test file. If a user wants to include new known AMR or non-AMR sequences to augment the training datasets, PARGT provides an option to do so for the five above-mentioned resistance classes. In addition, it provides the option of restoring the original training datasets in case a user decides they prefer to use them or or else wants to compare predictions using two different sets of training data.Figure 2Illustration of the PARGT GUI with its pop-up menu.Full size image
DatasetsWe retrieved protein sequences for AMR genes from the Antibiotic Resistance Genes Database (ARDB)42, and non-AMR sequences were obtained from the PATRIC28, 29. Initially, we gathered 124 bac and 374 van AMR sequences for the Gram-positive bacteria Clostridium spp. and Enterococcus spp., and we randomly chose 52 essential protein sequences to use as non-AMR sequences. As many of the protein sequences were duplicates, CD-HIT43, 44 was applied to find unique sequences. A sequence identity of \(\ge \) 90% was used as a threshold for removing duplicate sequences. After eliminating redundant protein sequences, our final counts were 25 bac and 52 van AMR sequences; none of the 52 non-AMR sequences were duplicates. We used this dataset to train our machine-learning model. In addition to the training dataset, we also gathered 102 bac and 22 van AMR sequences and 14 non-AMR sequences for the Gram-positive bacteria Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., and Listeria spp. from the data sources indicated above. We again applied CD-HIT to this dataset, and after the removal of duplicate sequences, 6 bac and 9 van AMR sequences and 14 non-AMR sequences remained. We used these as our test dataset to measure the accuracy of the classifier. The sequence identity of protein sequences could be as low as 10%. After validating our GTDWFE algorithm with the training and test sequences for the bac and van AMR classes, we again trained our classifier, but we used the sequences from all five bacterial genera, i.e., both training and test sequences, to potentially increase the accuracy of PARGT. The same retraining was also performed for our Gram-negative bacteria.
Data availability|
NCBI27 accession numbers for all proteins used in this work are listed in Supplementary Tables S3–S5. All experimental data are available at https://github.com/abu034004/PARGT.

Code availability|
The open source PARGT software package implemented for this work and the user’s manual are available at https://github.com/abu034004/PARGT.

Acknowledgements|This work was supported in part by the Carl M. Hansen Foundation.
Author information|AffiliationsSchool of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State University, P.O. Box 642752, Pullman, Washington, USAAbu Sayed Chowdhury, Douglas R. Call & Shira L. BroschatPaul G. Allen School for Global Animal Health, Washington State University, P.O. Box 647090, Pullman, Washington, USADouglas R. Call & Shira L. BroschatDepartment of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State University, P.O. Box 647040, Pullman, Washington, USADouglas R. Call & Shira L. BroschatAuthorsAbu Sayed ChowdhuryView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarDouglas R. CallView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarShira L. BroschatView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsA.S.C. collected the data, designed the method, implemented the software tool, performed the experiments, analyzed the simulation results, and prepared the initial manuscript. D.R.C. and S.L.B. analyzed the collected data, approved the method, guided the simulations, revised the manuscript, and further interpreted the simulation results. The manuscript is reviewed and approved by all authors.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to
                Abu Sayed Chowdhury.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information|Publisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information|
Supplementary Tables
Rights and permissions|
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleChowdhury, A.S., Call, D.R. & Broschat, S.L. PARGT: a software tool for predicting antimicrobial resistance in bacteria.
                    Sci Rep 10, 11033 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-67949-9Download citationReceived: 17 January 2020Accepted: 16 June 2020Published: 03 July 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-67949-9
Comments|By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.
Abstract|The density structure of the interstellar medium determines where stars form and release energy, momentum and heavy elements, driving galaxy evolution1,2,3,4. Density variations are seeded and amplified by gas motion, but the exact nature of this motion is unknown across spatial scales and galactic environments5. Although dense star-forming gas probably emerges from a combination of instabilities6,7, convergent flows8 and turbulence9, establishing the precise origin is challenging because it requires gas motion to be quantified over many orders of magnitude in spatial scale. Here we measure10,11,12 the motion of molecular gas in the Milky Way and in nearby galaxy NGC 4321, assembling observations that span a spatial dynamic range 10−1–103 pc. We detect ubiquitous velocity fluctuations across all spatial scales and galactic environments. Statistical analysis of these fluctuations indicates how star-forming gas is assembled. We discover oscillatory gas flows with wavelengths ranging from 0.3–400 pc. These flows are coupled to regularly spaced density enhancements that probably form via gravitational instabilities13,14. We also identify stochastic and scale-free velocity and density fluctuations, consistent with the structure generated in turbulent flows9. Our results demonstrate that the structure of the interstellar medium cannot be considered in isolation. Instead, its formation and evolution are controlled by nested, interdependent flows of matter covering many orders of magnitude in spatial scale.
Main|We use observations that trace molecular gas in a variety of galactic environments and span a wide range of spatial scales. We measure the position–position–velocity (p–p–v) structure of the molecular interstellar medium (ISM) from 0.1 pc scales, relevant for individual star-forming cores up to the scales of individual giant molecular clouds (GMCs), now accessible in nearby galaxies using facilities such as the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA). On large (from 100 pc to >1,000 pc) scales, we analyse observations of nearby galaxy NGC 4321 from the Physics at High Angular resolution in Nearby Galaxies (PHANGS-ALMA) survey. At intermediate (from 1 pc to 100 pc) scales, we target both the Galactic Disk and the Central Molecular Zone (CMZ, the central 500 pc) of the Milky Way with data from the Galactic Ring Survey15 and the Mopra CMZ survey16, respectively. On small scales (from 0.1 pc to around 10 pc), we include observations of two dense molecular clouds: G035.39–00.33 (ref. 17) in the Galactic disk and G0.253+0.016 (ref. 11) in the CMZ. We summarize the observations in Extended Data Fig. 1.We extract the kinematics of the gas using spectral decomposition, modelling each spectrum as a set of individual Gaussian emission features10,11,12. Spectral decomposition is advantageous because it yields a description of all prominent emission features observed in spectroscopic data. We visualize the results using the peak intensities and velocity centroids of the modelled emission features (Fig. 1). This method facilitates the detection of small fluctuations in velocity, which can often be hidden by techniques that either average in the spectral domain or integrate over one of the two spatial directions. We discover striking similarity in the p–p–v structure of the molecular ISM in all of our selected environments, despite our observations probing vastly different spatial scales. The p–p–v volumes presented in Fig. 1 (see also Supplementary Videos 1–10) reveal the complex multiscale dynamical structure of the molecular ISM. The ‘wiggles’ evident in all datasets represent localized gas flows superposed on larger-scale ordered motion.Fig. 1: Ubiquitous velocity fluctuations throughout the molecular ISM.Here we show p−p−v volumes of different galactic environments (see also Supplementary Videos 1–5). The data points indicate the x−y positions and velocities of individual Gaussian emission features extracted from each dataset using spectral decomposition (see Methods). The colour indicates the peak intensity of each emission feature (see the cartoon in the bottom left). The different columns illustrate decreasing spatial scale, from kiloparsec scales on the left down to subparsec scales on the right. The rows highlight differences in galactic environments, from galaxy disks (top) to the CMZ (bottom). a−e, The individual regions are: NGC 4321 (a); a region in the Milky Way’s Galactic Disk (b); the Northern part of the infrared dark cloud (IRDC), G035.39–00.33 (c); the inner 250 pc of the Milky Way (the CMZ) (d); and IRDC G0.253+0.016 (e). We include 3D scale bars in the bottom corners of each panel to indicate the physical scaling as well as the orientation of each p−p−v volume. Note that our selected region in the Galactic Disk (b) contains gas located at different distances. The scale bar is correct for a distance of 3 kpc, which is relevant for the statistical analysis of our selected GMC (see Methods). Inset image credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/R. Hurt (SSC-Caltech).Full size imageMeasuring the dynamical coupling between ISM density enhancements and their local environment is key to understanding the formation of hierarchically structured star-forming gas1. The structure of dense gas that is weakly dynamically coupled to the local environment should show little or no correlation with observed gas flows. In contrast, density structures produced by ongoing convergent flows should be closely coupled to the gas flows8,18. In the specific case of instability-driven structure formation, preferred characteristic scales may be present in both density6,19 and velocity. Between the scales of energy injection and dissipation, turbulence is instead characterized by scale-free fluctuations in both density and velocity9.We select a subregion from each dataset presented in Fig. 1 to represent the hierarchy of the ISM. We first select part of the southernmost dominant spiral arm in NGC 4321 and, in the CMZ, a portion of the gas orbiting the centre of the Galaxy at a galactocentric radius of about 100 pc. We then select two GMCs, one in the Galactic Disk and another in the CMZ. Finally, we select an individual filament that is embedded within our selected GMC in the Galactic Disk. Maps of all of the regions can be found in Extended Data Fig. 2.We use structure functions to measure the coupling between the observed gas flows and the physical structure of the gas in each subregion (see Methods and Supplementary Information). Normalized, noise-corrected structure functions of velocity and gas density are presented in Fig. 2. The velocity structure functions measured in one dimension along the crests of the spiral arm of NGC 4321 (Fig. 2a) and in the CMZ gas stream (Fig. 2d) exhibit local minima at specific spatial scales. Structure functions display localized minima in response to periodicity in spatial or temporal data, indicating that the observed velocity fluctuations oscillate with an intrinsic wavelength (for an intuitive demonstration of this behaviour, see the Supplementary Information and Supplementary Fig. 1). We measure the wavelengths of these oscillations as being \(40{5}_{-76}^{+92}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) and \(22.{0}_{-6.3}^{+5.4}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) in the spiral arm and CMZ gas stream, respectively. The coherent nature of these oscillatory motions, detected over 102–103 pc scales, is inconsistent with the characteristically scale-free motion produced in a turbulent flow.Fig. 2: Correlated density and velocity fluctuations.Each panel shows normalized and noise-corrected second-order structure functions (S2) of density (coloured dashed lines) and velocity (coloured solid lines) taken from a subsample of the datasets presented in Fig. 1. The regions selected for this analysis are shown in Extended Data Fig. 2 (see Methods). a, A portion of the southernmost dominant spiral arm in NGC 4321. b, A GMC located within the Galactic Disk. c, An individual filament located within the same GMC. d, A portion of the CMZ gas stream. e, A GMC located within the CMZ. Vertical coloured dotted lines in a, c and d indicate the spatial scale of periodic fluctuations in density and velocity (the horizontal black lines indicate the uncertainty on these measurements; Table 1). Black dotted lines in b and e are power-law fits to the structure functions (the fit range is indicated by the coloured horizontal dashed and solid lines). The dark grey shaded area indicates the range of lags for which the recovered structure function is unreliable owing to the limited spatial resolution of the data. Inset image credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/R. Hurt (SSC-Caltech).Source dataFull size imageInspection of the corresponding density structure functions reveals periodicity on equivalent spatial scales to that detected in velocity. In the spiral arm, we find a minimum located at \(36{6}_{-77}^{+88}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\). In the CMZ, two minima are identified at \(6.{0}_{-0.6}^{+0.8}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) and \(21.{8}_{-6.3}^{+5.5}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\), respectively. The periodicity implied by these localized minima corresponds to the regular spacing of molecular cloud complexes detected in CO (2–1) emission in the spiral arm of NGC 4321 and GMCs detected in dust continuum emission in the CMZ gas stream, respectively (emission profiles extracted along the crests of these structures are shown in Extended Data Fig. 3). The derived separation of the cloud complexes in the spiral arm of NGC 4321 agrees with the 410 pc spacing of embedded star clusters independently identified using mid-infrared observations14. Multiple minima detected in the density structure function of the CMZ gas stream suggest that GMCs separated by \(6.{0}_{-0.6}^{+0.8}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) are clustered together in groups separated by \(21.{8}_{-6.3}^{+5.5}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\). This is confirmed via inspection of the distribution of N2H+(1–0) emission from which our velocity information is derived (see Supplementary Information).The phase difference between the density and velocity fluctuations encodes the physical origins of the detected gas flows. In the spiral arm, we find that the velocities of the molecular cloud complexes are almost always blueshifted with respect to the rotational velocity of the galaxy at this location. The molecular cloud complexes, detected as peaks in the CO (2–1) emission, therefore reside where the velocity gradient is close to zero (Extended Data Fig. 4a). Combining knowledge of the inclination and rotation14,20 of NGC 4321 with the location of our selected arm with respect to the corotation radius of the spiral pattern (7.1–9.1 kpc; ref. 21), we conclude that the observed oscillation probably results from a combination of spiral streaming motions and radial gravitational inflow22. Conversely, in the CMZ, the locations of N2H+ (1–0) emission peaks spatially correlate with extrema in the velocity gradient (see Extended Data Fig. 4). This signature implies that the gas flows are converging towards the emission peaks. In this context, the GMCs observed in the CMZ gas stream may be the result of hierarchical collapse8, whereby large-scale cloud complexes fed by flows on \(22.{0}_{-6.3}^{+5.4}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) scales have fragmented into a series of GMCs separated by \(6.{0}_{-0.6}^{+0.8}\,{\mathrm{pc}}\). Further discussion on the nature of these flows can be found in the Supplementary Information.As molecular clouds form at the stagnation points of convergent flows, the kinetic energy cascading from large to small scales contributes to the supersonically turbulent motions that produce the complex and scale-free structure observed within GMCs9,18. Indeed, in contrast to the characteristic scaling observed in the density and velocity structure described above, the internal physical structure of our selected GMCs in the Galactic Disk and in the CMZ is multidimensional, complex and without regularity (see Extended Data Fig. 2b,e). This is confirmed in Fig. 2b,e, where we show that the structure functions of both density and velocity scale as power laws. This scale-free behaviour is also reflected in structure functions computed over discrete azimuthal angles, indicating that the velocity fluctuations do not exhibit a preferred orientation (see Methods).There is broad agreement between the scaling of our velocity structure functions (0.41 ± 0.01 and 0.37 ± 0.01 for the GMCs in the disk and CMZ, respectively) and the distribution of measured scaling exponents for the Galactic linewidth–size relationship23, which is often interpreted as evidence for the presence of supersonic turbulence in molecular clouds24. However, we caution that the scaling of velocity structure functions has been interpreted in many different ways and may be subject to observational biases (see Supplementary Information). Despite the similarity in the scaling exponents of the two regions, the velocity fluctuations in the CMZ are greater than those in the disk by a factors of 10–100 when measured on a fixed spatial scale, consistent with the elevated levels of turbulence present within the inner Galaxy10,23.Shocks generated by supersonic turbulence contribute to the formation of the filamentary structure that pervades molecular clouds9,25. High-resolution observations of one of the density enhancements detected in our Galactic Disk GMC reveal a complex internal network of dense, velocity-coherent filaments17 (see Extended Data Fig. 2b,c). Embedded within each of these filaments is a population of density enhancements representing the formation sites of individual stars and stellar systems17,26. In analogy to the gas flows observed on much larger scales along the spiral arm of NGC 4321 and in the CMZ gas stream, we find that the velocity fluctuations observed along the spine of our selected GMC filament exhibit periodicity on \(0.2{8}_{-0.08}^{+0.06}\,{\mathrm{pc}}\) scales (Fig. 2c). The wavelength of these velocity oscillations is comparable to the separation of density enhancements along the filament (\(0.3{2}_{-0.01}^{+0.01}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\)). Furthermore, the locations of some of these density enhancements spatially correlate with extrema in the velocity gradient (Extended Data Fig. 4c), indicative of either convergent motion or collapse-induced rotation27.A promising candidate driving the formation of periodic density fluctuations, and their correlated gas flows, is gravitational instabilities. We find that the separation of the periodic density enhancements observed in the spiral arm, CMZ gas stream and GMC filament are factors of 3−5 times greater than the beam-deconvolved diameters of their parent structures (122 ± 5 pc, 4.2 ± 0.2 pc and 0.107 ± 0.001 pc, respectively; see Table 1). Periodic density enhancements arranged like beads on a string along their parent filaments have been observed in nearby galaxy disks6,14, as well as in local molecular clouds19,28, and frequently show separation-to-diameter ratios consistent with those measured in this study (see the Supplementary Information). This measured ratio is consistent with theoretical work describing the gravitational fragmentation of filaments, both on large29 and small30,31 scales. Our findings now extend this result by showing that the separation-to-diameter ratio in the velocity structure of the ISM matches that of the density enhancements.Table 1 Characteristic length scalesFull size tableThe combined analysis of density structure and gas kinematics, as well as the spatial dynamic range covered in our study, represents a novel approach to understanding gas flows in the ISM and their relation to the emergence of physical structure. Our results indicate that the formation and evolution of dense star-forming gas across this sample of environments is controlled by nested, interdependent gas flows. The natural next steps are to apply this approach to an unbiased sample of regions, as well as to synthetic observations of numerical simulations, which together will provide critical insight into the role that the galactic environment plays in setting the scale and magnitude of the gas flows that seed star formation in galaxies.
Methods|Environment selectionOur observations cover a spatial dynamic range of about four orders of magnitude, from kiloparsec scales in the nearby galaxy NGC 4321 down to 0.1 pc scales in the Milky Way. In the following section we describe our environment selection.NGC 4321Located in the Virgo cluster, NGC 4321 (M100) is a barred grand-design spiral galaxy of class SAB(s)bc32. The galaxy is highly structured with two well-defined spiral arms with strong symmetry33. The galaxy has a stellar bar and a nuclear ring with a radius of about 1 kpc (ref. 34). Strings of regularly spaced star-forming regions extend over kiloparsec distances within thin dust filaments throughout its disk14,35.The Galactic DiskOn intermediate scales in the Milky Way Disk, we include observations of the massive (5 × 105 M⊙; ref. 36) GMF 38.1–32.4b (ref. 36). GMFs are a class of elongated giant molecular clouds36,37,38,39. Our selection of GMF 38.1–32.4b is based on its association with the IRDC G035.39–00.33, which provides the basis for the high-resolution component of our study of galaxy disks (see below). GMF 38.1–32.4b is almost orthogonal to the Galactic Plane and has a length of 80 pc and an aspect ratio about 1:12 (refs. 36,40).G035.39–00.33Situated at a kinematic distance of 2.9 kpc (ref. 41), G035.39–00.33 is a massive (104 M⊙; ref. 42) and filamentary IRDC embedded within GMF 38.1–32.4b and is thought to harbour the early stages of star formation43,44. The structure and dynamics of G035.39–00.33 have been studied extensively, revealing the presence of multiple subfilaments that feed their embedded core population17,26,45,46,47,48.CMZThe inner few hundred parsecs of the Milky Way contain approximately 3–5% of the Milky Way’s molecular gas, a reservoir of 2–7 × 107 M⊙ of molecular material23,49. The physical conditions of the gas are extreme compared with those in the galaxy disks discussed above: the density50,51,52, temperature53,54, velocity dispersion10,55, radiation field56, pressure57,58 and cosmic ray ionization rate59 are larger by factors of a few to several orders of magnitude. The gas is distributed throughout several coherent streams spanning 250 km s−1 in velocity and with projected lengths of the order 100–250 pc (refs. 10,60,61,62).G0.253+0.016On small scales in the CMZ, we focus on the IRDC G0.253+0.016. With a mass of around 105 M⊙ and an equivalent radius of just 2–3 pc, G0.253+0.016 is one of the densest molecular clouds in the Galaxy50,63,64. Despite this, G0.253+0.016 shows very few signatures of active star formation65. Although single-dish observations depict G0.253+0.016 as a single, coherent and centrally condensed molecular cloud66, more recent work suggests that G0.253+0.016 is dynamically complex and hierarchically structured11.Observations and dataHere we describe the observations and data, summarizing the relevant information in Extended Data Fig. 1.NGC 4321We analyse CO (2–1) emission from NGC 4321 (M100) observed by ALMA as part of the pilot programme for the PHANGS-ALMA survey (A. K. Leroy et al., manuscript in preparation). These Cycle 3 (programme 2015.1.00956.S) observations covered the galaxy using ALMA’s main array of 12 m telescopes, the 7 m telescopes from the Morita Atacama Compact Array and the total power dishes. The galaxy was covered by two large mosaics, which were observed separately. Data calibration used the standard ALMA pipeline. For imaging, we combined the data from the 12 m and 7 m arrays, carried out a multiscale deconvolution and then ‘feathered’ the interferometric images with the total power data to produce the final images. A first version of these maps initially appeared in ref. 67. Sample selection, observing strategy, data reduction, imaging and post-processing are described in A. K. Leroy et al. (manuscript in preparation).Relevant to this work, these data include total power and short spacing information and so have sensitivity to all spatial scales. For imaging, we binned the data to have a channel width of 2.5 km s−1. During post-processing, two mosaics were convolved to share a matched ∼1.6″ beam (~120 pc at the adopted distance to NGC 4321 of 15.2 Mpc; ref. 68) and then linearly combined to form a single data cube covering most bright CO emission from the galaxy. Following ref. 67, ~70% of the total CO emission present in the target region is recovered at good signal to noise at 1.6″ resolution.The Galactic DiskWe use data from the Boston University Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory (FCRAO) Galactic Ring Survey (GRS15). This survey covered the lowest rotational transition of the 13CO isotopologue (J = 1→0) with an angular resolution of 46″, a pixel sampling of 22″ and a spectral resolution of 0.21 km s−1. At a distance of 3 kpc, relevant for GMF 38.1–32.4b36, the angular resolution of these data corresponds to a physical resolution of about 0.7 pc. The GRS covers a range in Galactic longitude, l, and latitude, b, of 14.0° < l < 56.0° and −1.1° < b < 1.1°. The region displayed in Fig. 1b thereby encloses both GMF 38.1–32.4b and G035.39–00.33 and covers 33.0° < l < 38.0°, the full Galactic latitude coverage, and 25 ≤ vLSR ≤ 70 km s−1. Note that because of our view through the Galactic Plane, this panel contains molecular gas situated at different distances, and GMF 38.1–32.4b comprises only a small fraction of these data (see the Data selection for statistical analysis section).G035.39–00.33We analyse N2H+ (1−0) emission associated with G035.39–00.33 observed with the Institut de Radioastronomie Millimétrique (IRAM) Plateau de Bure Interferometer. These data were first presented in refs. 17,26. The observations cover the northern portion of the cloud and have an angular extent of 40″ × 150″ (0.6 pc × 2.1 pc; assuming a kinematic distance of 2.9 kpc; ref. 41). These data were combined with IRAM-30m telescope observations first presented in ref. 45 to recover the zero-spacing information. The data are convolved to a circular beam of 5″ (the native spatial resolution is 3.9″ × 3.2″), corresponding to a physical resolution of 0.07 pc. In this study, we retain the native pixel scaling of 0.76″ (ref. 17 downsampled the data to 2″ pixels). The spectral resolution of the data is 0.14 km s−1, and the sensitivity is of the order 1 mJy per beam. Further details of these observations and their combination are included in ref. 17.CMZWe use data from the Mopra CMZ survey16. These observations cover the region −0.65° < l < 1.1° and −0.25° < b <0.20°, which incorporates material within a galactocentric radius of approximately 125 pc (assuming a distance of 8,340 pc; ref. 69). The spatial resolution of the observations is 60″, which corresponds to a physical resolution of 2.4 pc. The spectral resolution of the observations is 2 km s−1. The data included in Fig. 1d show the HNC (1−0) emission analysed in ref. 10, which is extended over the entire CMZ. However, note that for our statistical study we use N2H+ (1−0), consistent with ref. 13 (see the Spectral decomposition section). We refer the reader to refs. 10,16 for further discussion on these data.The Herschel column density data was computed using modified blackbody fits to the HiGAL data70, using the 160, 250, 350 and 500 μm bands (C. Battersby et al., manuscript in preparation). The 70 μm band was excluded from the fit due to possible contamination from very small, warm dust grains. At the wavelengths observed with Herschel, there is considerable contamination from Galactic cirrus emission, which was removed through an iterative process described in refs. 71,72. All of the data were smoothed to the HiGAL reported beam size at the longest wavelength, 36″ (ref. 70), and the maps are presented at this resolution.G0.253+0.016We include the ALMA Cycle 0 observations (programme 2011.0.00217.S) of IRDC G0.253+0.016 studied in detail by ref. 11. These data were first presented in ref. 64. The observations cover the full 180″ × 60″ (7.1 pc × 2.4 pc; assuming a distance of 8,340 pc; ref. 69) extent of the molecular cloud. We focus exclusively on the HNCO 4(0,4) − 3(0,3) transition. These data were combined with single-dish observations from the The Millimeter Astronomy Legacy Team 90 GHz (MALT90) survey73,74 to recover the zero-spacing information. The spatial resolution of the data is 1.7″, which corresponds to a physical resolution of 0.07 pc. The spectral resolution of the data is 3.4 km s−1.Spectral decompositionIn this section, we describe the spectral decomposition of the data discussed above. For an introduction to the methodology and a description of the techniques used, we refer the reader to the Supplementary Information. The spectral decomposition of the CMZ fields displayed in Fig. 1d,e is described in full in refs. 10,11, respectively. Although Fig. 1d shows the HNC (1−0) decomposition to better highlight extended emission, we use the decomposition of N2H+ (1−0) emission for the structure function analysis presented in Fig. 2d, consistent with ref. 13.New to this work, we apply SCOUSEPY (version 1.0) to the CO (2−1) data towards NGC 4321. We set the width of our Spectral Averaging Areas (SAAs) to 100 pixels, corresponding to about 1.8 kpc at the assumed distance of NGC 4321 (15.2 Mpc). A total of 1.1 × 105 model solutions were obtained out of the 2.3 × 105 included in the SAA coverage. A total of 1.2 × 105 Gaussian components were extracted during the fitting procedure, indicating that the models were mostly single-component fits. Multiple component fits were largely confined to the inner part of the Galaxy and a few concentrated regions in the spiral arms.The decomposition of the Galactic disk region, focusing on GMF 38.1–32.4b36, is performed using the machine learning algorithm GAUSSPY+ (version 0.2)12 (see Supplementary Information). The details of the decomposition of the entire 13CO (1−0) GRS dataset are described in full in ref. 75. We train GAUSSPY with 12 training sets each containing 500 randomly chosen spectra from the GRS data set. These training sets are automatically generated with GAUSSPY+, and their decomposition was benchmarked against the training set functionality of SCOUSEPY11, which takes randomly sampled regions of survey data for training set development. We find good agreement between the results of the two methods in these subregions, justifying our application of GAUSSPY+. Figure 1b shows a subsample of the GRS decomposition containing almost 3 × 105 components within 33°< l < 38°, the full Galactic latitude coverage, and 25 ≤ vLSR ≤ 70 km s−1.For G035.39–00.33, the spectral decomposition is performed using SCOUSEPY and therefore differs from that originally presented in ref. 17. We perform our Gaussian decomposition focusing exclusively on the isolated F1, F = 0,1 → 1,2, component of the J = 1→0 transition of N2H+ at 93,176.2522 MHz (ref. 76). We set the width of our SAAs to 16 pixels, corresponding to about 0.2 pc at the assumed distance of G035.39–00.33 (2.9 kpc). A total of 1.5 × 104 velocity components were fitted to 7 × 103 pixels, and multiple velocity components are required to describe the spectral line profiles over a significant (69%) portion of the map.Data selection for statistical analysisIn the following section, we describe our data selection for the statistical analysis presented in Fig. 2. A potential source of uncertainty in interpreting the results from kinematic analysis methods is that observational data is sensitive only to estimators of the true underlying density and velocity fields. Spectral decomposition, which relies on the profile of emission lines, can be vulnerable to the influence of velocity crowding77,78,79 and variations in optical depth. Fortunately, the influence of these effects can be mitigated through careful selection of environment and spectral lines.We select subregions from each of the five environments discussed in the Environment selection section and presented in Fig. 1. We select three subregions, which, despite tracing vastly different scales, display similar morphology in that they are highly filamentary and (qualitatively) interspersed with quasiperiodic intensity peaks along their crests: part of the southern spiral arm in NGC 4321, part of the CMZ gas stream and a filament embedded within a GMC located in the Galactic Disk. We further select two GMCs, one in the Galactic Disk and one in the Milky Way’s CMZ, the intensity profiles of which are complex and disordered. Our selected regions are displayed in Extended Data Fig. 2.Spiral armFor our analysis of NGC 4321, we select a region that shows a sample of regularly spaced infrared peaks14. These star-forming complexes, inferred by the presence of mid-infrared emission, are located within NGC 4321’s southern spiral arm (see green crosses in fig. 4 of ref. 14).We expect that the influence of velocity crowding is minimized in this region by the limited molecular scale height of the galaxy, which is viewed face on. Similarly, although the CO (2−1) is probably optically thick, single velocity components provide a suitable description for most of the CO (2−1) emission along the arm. This indicates that our centroid measurements are not strongly influenced by optical depth effects. Where two velocity components are necessary to model the emission, the secondary component (that is, the one that appears in addition to the component most closely tracing the spiral arm) is often spatially localized and compact, of low brightness temperature and offset in velocity from the emission tracing the arm. We remove these additional components by selecting the brightest velocity component at each location. We further select the molecular cloud complexes that follow the coherent structure of the spiral using GLUE80,81. Extended Data Fig. 2a shows the data that we have selected for our statistical analysis.Galactic Disk GMCThe effect of velocity crowding is particularly pertinent in studies of the Milky Way, where our view through the Galactic Plane complicates our physical interpretation of p−p−v space. Molecular clouds, coherent in true 3D space may be separated in p−p−v space due to complex dynamics. Similarly, molecular clouds projected along the same line-of-sight, but otherwise physically decoupled, may crowd in p−p−v space. These effects are expected to be most prominent towards the tangent point velocities of the Milky Way’s rotation curve75. As GMF 38.1–32.4b is separated by around 40 km s−1 from the tangent point velocity at l = 35° (ref. 82), we expect the effects of velocity crowding to be small.The gas associated with GMF 38.1–32.4b makes up only a small fraction of the total emission displayed in Fig. 1b. To isolate this GMC from the sample of data shown in Fig. 1b, we use ACORNS11, an n-dimensional unsupervised clustering algorithm designed for the analysis of spectroscopic p−p−v data11. We apply ACORNS directly to the data shown in Fig. 1b. We cluster the data on the basis of position, centroid velocity and the velocity dispersion information provided by our decomposition. From the resulting hierarchy of clusters, we identify the cluster that most closely matches the morphology of GMF 38.1–32.4b as identified by ref. 36. The result of this analysis is displayed in Extended Data Fig. 2b, where we show the peak brightness temperature of the 13CO (1−0) emission of the ACORNS cluster. Our ACORNS-identified cluster shows excellent agreement with the GMF extracted in ref. 36, which is highlighted by the white contour.GMC filamentThe association between GMF 38.1–32.4b and IRDC G035.39–00.33 is evident in Extended Data Fig. 2b, where G035.39–00.33 is identified as a compact, bright source of 13CO (1−0) emission. We apply ACORNS to our new decomposition of the N2H+ (1−0) data. Our clustering analysis is consistent with the results of ref. 17 in that the N2H+ (1−0) emission is mainly distributed throughout three dominant subfilaments (see also ref. 48). This high-density gas tracer is less susceptible to the effects of velocity crowding and line-of-sight confusion83. Furthermore, the isolated hyperfine component of N2H+ (1−0) is measured to be optically thin17. The subfilament selected for our structure function analysis is shown in Extended Data Fig. 2c. The filament exhibits strong, localized velocity fluctuations along its primary axis (evident in Fig. 1c).CMZAs proof of concept of our statistical analysis, we reanalyse the region of the CMZ studied by ref. 13. In general, the effects of velocity crowding are less prominent in the CMZ, where the gas is distributed throughout molecular streams that are well separated in velocity10,62. Our selected region is located between −0.65° < l < 0.0° and −0.05° < b < 0.1°, and is associated both with a series of quasiregularly spaced molecular cloud condensations and an oscillatory pattern in the centroid velocity of the molecular gas. This velocity pattern is observed in multiple tracers10,13,84,85, indicating that it is of dynamical origin, and not simply the result of excitation or optical depth effects. Extended Data Fig. 2d displays the Herschel-derived column density map (C. Battersby et al., manuscript in preparation) covering the region that displays the coherent velocity oscillation investigated in ref. 13. These data were selected using the software GLUE80,81, using the location of the centroid velocity measurements from ref. 13 as a guide for masking.CMZ GMCWe focus our analysis on one of the dominant substructures of G0.253+0.016, extracted using ACORNS11. The distribution of optically thin11 emission from the 4(0,4) – 3(0,3) transition of HNCO throughout our selected substructure, labelled ‘tree C’ in ref. 11, is morphologically similar to that of the dust continuum emission associated with the cloud. This structure therefore probably dominates the internal physical composition of G0.253+0.016. The HNCO 4(0,4) − 3(0,3) emission profile of this substructure is displayed in the bottom-right panel of Extended Data Fig. 2e.Statistical analysis of the observational dataIn the following section, we discuss our statistical analysis of our selected subregions. We group the subregions according to their dominant geometry: either long and filamentary or multidimensional and complex. The physical interpretation of the following analysis is discussed at length in the Summary of the results and physical interpretation section of the Supplementary Information.Analysis of filamentary structuresWe perform our analysis along the crests of each subregion. We obtain the crest of each filamentary structure by applying FILFINDER86 to our selected density tracer in each environment, CO (2−1) in the spiral arm, the Herschel-derived column density map in the CMZ and the N2H+ (1−0) emission in the GMC filament (see Extended Data Fig. 2).We perform a weighted mean of our selected density tracer (weighting by the square of the Gaussian fit amplitude value) orthogonal to the crest. The resulting profiles (solid) and the standard deviation about the mean (shaded region) are shown in the top panels of Extended Data Fig. 3.For the velocity field, we remove the bulk motion by modelling it with a simple polynomial function and subtracting this model from the velocity field derived from our spectral decomposition, leaving only the residual local velocity fluctuations. We measure a weighted mean velocity (weighting by the square of the Gaussian fit amplitude value) orthogonal to the crest. The resulting distributions (solid line) and the standard deviation about the mean (shaded region) are shown in the bottom panels of Extended Data Fig. 3.We compute the one-dimensional (1D) structure function, Sp, on the data presented in Extended Data Fig. 3 using$${S}_{p}({\ell })=\langle \delta x{({\bf{r}},{\ell })}^{p}\rangle =\langle | x({\bf{r}})-x({\bf{r}}+{\ell }){| }^{p}\rangle ,$$
                    (1)
                where the quantity δx(r,ℓ) represents the absolute difference in the quantity x measured between two locations, r and r + ℓ separated by lag ℓ. The structure function, Sp(ℓ), averages this quantity (raised to the pth power, the order) over all locations (indicated by the angle brackets). For a more comprehensive description of the structure function and its behaviour we refer the reader to the Structure functions and their application to toy models section in the Supplementary Information.As the structure function compares pairs of points at a given ℓ, the maximum, fully sampled lag that fits within these 1D datasets is half of the total length of each crest. This defines our upper limit to the spatial scales over which the structure functions presented in Fig. 2 are computed. We generate noise-corrected structure functions by computing the structure function of the measurement uncertainties associated with our Gaussian fit components and subtracting this from the structure functions of the signal. A comprehensive description of the behaviour of the structure function in response to instrumental noise is included in the Supplementary Information. The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 2.We estimate the uncertainty on the structure function as$${\sigma }_{{S}_{2}}({\ell })=\frac{\sigma ({\ell })}{\sqrt{{N}_{{\rm{indep}}}}}$$
                    (2)
                where σ represents the standard deviation of the measurements obtained at a given ℓ and Nindep is the number of independent measurements of S2 taken at that same value of ℓ.Each of the structure functions relating to our filamentary structures displays local minima at specific spatial scales. For our density tracers (dashed lines), these minima occur at spatial scales of \({\lambda }_{\rho }=36{6}_{-77}^{+88}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) in the spiral arm, both \(6.{0}_{-0.6}^{+0.8}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) and \(21.{8}_{-6.3}^{+5.5}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) in the CMZ and \(0.3{2}_{-0.01}^{+0.01}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) in the GMC filament (Table 1). The uncertainties on each of these measurements represent the full-width at half-minimum for each of the minima detected in the structure function. Periodicity in the density structure indicates that density enhancements are forming with a preferred, or characteristic, spacing. The structure function therefore provides a quantitative measure of the periodicity that is qualitatively evident in the maps presented in Extended Data Fig. 2. We demonstrate the response of the structure function to periodicity using toy models in the Supplementary Information (see Supplementary Fig. 1 for an example).We compute the beam-deconvolved diameters of the filamentary structures for comparison with the above derived characteristic spacing. To do this, we use FilFinder86 to compute radial intensity profiles normal to the spines identified above. We fit the radial profile with a Gaussian model with a mean centred on the filament spine and a constant background. The model is then deconvolved with the beam of the observations. For the spiral arm, CMZ stream and GMC filament we measure beam-deconvolved diameters of D = 122 ± 5 pc, 4.2 ± 0.2 pc and 0.107 ± 0.001 pc, respectively; the characteristic wavelengths derived above are therefore of the order 3, 5 and 3 times the diameters of their parent structures, respectively.Perhaps a more surprising feature of structure functions presented in Fig. 2 is that the velocity fluctuations along the crests of our selected regions also display periodic behaviour. Moreover, the characteristic wavelengths of the velocity fluctuations in each environment agree, within the uncertainties, with the periodicity detected in density. We measure the location of the minima in the velocity structure functions (solid lines) to be \({\lambda }_{v}=40{5}_{-76}^{+92}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) for the spiral arm, \(22.{0}_{-6.3}^{+5.4}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) for the CMZ and \(0.2{8}_{-0.08}^{+0.06}\,{\mathrm {pc}}\) in the GMC filament (Table 1).To assess the phase relationship between density (ρ) and velocity (v) fluctuations, we introduce the cross-correlation, which is defined$${\mathrm {XC}}({\ell })=\langle \rho ({\bf{r}})v({\bf{r}}+{\ell })\rangle .$$
                    (3)
                XC tells us how closely related the density and velocity fields are as a function of displacement, or ℓ, relative to one another.We define the associated uncertainty in the XC function as$${\sigma }_{\mathrm {XC}}^{2}({\ell })={\Sigma }_{{\bf{r}}}\left[{\sigma }_{\rho ({\bf{r}})}^{2}v{({\bf{r}}+{\ell })}^{2}\right]+{\Sigma }_{{\bf{r}}}\left[{\sigma }_{v({\bf{r}}+{\ell })}^{2}\rho {({\bf{r}})}^{2}\right]$$
                    (4)
                where σρ and σv represent the standard deviation of our measurements (shown as the coloured shaded regions in Extended Data Fig. 3). Given that both variables (density and velocity) exhibit periodicity in each of our subregions, and are therefore autocorrelated, the XC function has multiple peaks at different lags. We therefore identify all significant (XC(ℓ)/σXC(ℓ)) > 3) peaks in the XC function, and select the one that is located at the smallest ℓ, as the representative phase-shift between density and velocity.We measure phase differences between density and velocity of 191 ± 62 pc for the spiral arm, 2.7 ± 2.9 pc for the CMZ and 0.11 ± 0.03 pc for the GMC filament, respectively. The uncertainty in each of these measurements represents the standard deviation of a Gaussian fitted to the relevant peaks in the XC function.Given that the spatial resolution of our density (column density from Herschel) and velocity (N2H+ (1−0) emission from Mopra) tracers in the CMZ differ by a factor of two, we also compute the phase difference between density peaks and the velocity oscillations both derived from the N2H+ (1−0) emission and find 1.4 ± 2.9 pc (the emission profile of the N2H+ data is displayed in Extended Data Fig. 4b). Relative to the characteristic wavelengths derived for the velocity oscillations, λv, these phase differences are approximately λv/2 for the spiral arm, λv/8 (λv/16, for the N2H+ (1−0) emission) for the CMZ and 2λv/5 for the GMC filament, respectively.Analysis of multidimensional structuresThe emission associated with the GMCs selected in our study do not follow a simple linear morphology (see Extended Data Fig. 2b,e). Owing to the lack of a dominant geometry, the structure functions presented in Fig. 2b,e are computed in two dimensions, thereby averaging the density and velocity fluctuations over all azimuthal angles in each GMC.We generate noise-corrected structure functions by computing the structure function of the measurement uncertainties associated with our Gaussian fit components and subtracting this from the structure functions of the signal (see Supplementary Information). The structure functions presented in Fig. 2b,e display power-law behaviour over a limited spatial scale, consistent with scale-free fluctuations in both density (dashed lines) and velocity (solid lines). On large scales, the structure functions begin to flatten due to insufficient sampling87 (see Fig. 2). We fit the structure functions with power-law functions of the form \({S}_{s}({\ell })\propto {{\ell }}^{{\zeta }_{2}}\). We set the lower and upper limits of our fitting range to the beam size88 (0.65 pc and 0.07 pc for the GMCs in the disk and CMZ, respectively) and the approximate scale above which the structure functions begin to turn over (4 pc and 0.7 pc for the GMCs in the disk and CMZ, respectively).We find that the structure functions of density for our GMCs in the disk and CMZ increase with increasing spatial scale with scaling exponents ζ2 = 0.82 ± 0.03 and 0.91 ± 0.01. Similarly, we measure scaling exponents for the velocity structure functions of ζ2 = 0.82 ± 0.02 and ζ2 = 0.74 ± 0.01, respectively.We also investigate whether the scaling between the velocity structure functions and spatial scale differs as a function of direction. We compute the structure functions as a function of azimuthal angle in 10° increments between 0° (Galactic east–west) and 90° (Galactic north–south). We measure mean scaling exponents of ζ2 = 0.76 ± 0.03 and ζ2 = 0.72 ± 0.02 (where the uncertainty represents the standard deviation of the measurements), for the GMCs in the disk and CMZ, respectively. The small standard deviations of these measurements indicate that the velocity fluctuations have no preferred orientation. We find tentative evidence for a trend between our measured scaling exponents and increasing azimuthal angle in our CMZ GMC (R2 = 0.67, P = 0.003). No such trend is evident for our selected GMC in the Galactic Disk.
Data availability|
The 13CO (1−0) data of the Galactic Disk are from the Boston University-FCRAO GRS. The GRS data are publicly available at https://www.bu.edu/galacticring/new_data.html. The Mopra data are publicly available at http://newt.phys.unsw.edu.au/mopracmz/data.html. The ALMA HNCO 4(0,4) − 3(0,3) data of G0.253+0.016 are from project 2011.0.00217.S (principal investigator: J. Rathborne) and the raw data are publicly available through the ALMA archive (https://almascience.eso.org/alma-data/archive). All other data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Source data are provided with this paper.

Code availability|
SCOUSEPY and ACORNS, as well as the codes used for our statistical analyses, are freely available at https://github.com/jdhenshaw. GAUSSPY+ is available at https://github.com/mriener/gausspyplus. Assistance with this software can be provided by the corresponding author. 

Acknowledgements|We thank T. Müller from the Max Planck Institut für Astronomie for assisting with the data visualization and production of the Supplementary Videos. We thank J. Rathborne for making the data on G0.253+0.016 available, and P. Caselli, B. Elmegreen and J. Soler for discussions. J.M.D.K. and M.C. acknowledge funding from the German Research Foundation (DFG) in the form of an Emmy Noether Research Group grant (number KR4801/1-1) and DFG Sachbeihilfe grant (number KR4801/2-1). J.M.D.K. acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme via the ERC Starting Grant MUSTANG (grant agreement number 714907). M.R. and J.K. acknowledge funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement number 639459 (PROMISE). The work of A.K.L. and J.S. is partially supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant numbers 1615105, 1615109 and 1653300, and by NASA under ADAP grant numbers NNX16AF48G and NNX17AF39G. E.R. acknowledges the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) under funding reference number RGPIN-2017-03987. C.B. acknowledges support from the NSF under grant number 1816715. R.S.K. and S.C.O.G. acknowledge funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via the Collaborative Research Center (SFB 881 The Milky Way System; subprojects A1, B1, and B2) and from the Heidelberg Cluster of Excellence STRUCTURES in the framework of Germany’s Excellence Strategy (grant number EXC-2181/1-390900948). E.S. acknowledges funding from the ERC under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement number 694343). F.B. acknowledges funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement number 726384). J.P. acknowledges funding from the Programme National ‘Physique et Chimie du Milieu Interstellaire’ (PCMI) of CNRS/INSU with INC/INP, co-funded by CEA and CNES. The GRS is a joint project of Boston University and Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory, funded by the NSF under grant numbers AST-9800334, AST-0098562, AST-0100793, AST-0228993 and AST-0507657. The N2H+ (1−0) data of the CMZ was obtained using the Mopra radio telescope, a part of the Australia Telescope National Facility which is funded by the Commonwealth of Australia for operation as a National Facility managed by CSIRO. The University of New South Wales (UNSW) digital filter bank (the UNSW-MOPS) used for the observations with Mopra was provided with support from the Australian Research Council (ARC), UNSW, Sydney and Monash Universities, as well as CSIRO.
Author information|AffiliationsMax Planck Institut für Astronomie, Heidelberg, GermanyJonathan D. Henshaw, Manuel Riener, Eva Schinnerer, Henrik Beuther & Thomas HenningAstronomisches Rechen-Institut, Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, GermanyJ. M. Diederik Kruijssen & Mélanie ChevanceAstrophysics Research Institute, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UKSteven N. LongmoreDepartment of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USAAdam K. Leroy & Jiayi SunDepartment of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, CanadaErik Rosolowsky & Eric W. KochDepartment of Astronomy, University of Florida, Bryant Space Science Center, Gainesville, FL, USAAdam GinsburgDepartment of Physics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USACara BattersbySterrenkundig Observatorium, Universiteit Gent, Gent, BelgiumSharon E. MeidtInstitut für Theoretische Astrophysik, Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, GermanySimon C. O. Glover & Ralf S. KlessenUniversité de Toulouse, UPS-OMP, IRAP, Toulouse, FranceAnnie HughesCNRS, IRAP, Toulouse, FranceAnnie HughesDepartment of Space, Earth and Environment, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, SwedenJouni KainulainenMax Planck Institut für Extraterrestrische Physik, Garching bei München, GermanyAndreas SchrubaArgelander-Institut für Astronomie, Universität Bonn, Bonn, GermanyFrank BigielObservatories of the Carnegie Institution for Science, Pasadena, CA, USAGuillermo A. BlancDepartamento de Astronomía, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, ChileGuillermo A. BlancEuropean Southern Observatory, Garching bei München, GermanyEric EmsellemUniv. Lyon, Univ. Lyon1, ENS de Lyon, CNRS, Centre de Recherche Astrophysique de Lyon UMR5574, Saint-Genis-Laval, FranceEric EmsellemIRAM, Saint-Martin-d’Héres, FranceCynthia N. Herrera & Jérôme PetyLERMA, Observatoire de Paris, PSL Research University, CNRS, Sorbonne Universites, Paris, FranceJérôme PetySchool of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UKSarah E. RaganAuthorsJonathan D. HenshawView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJ. M. Diederik KruijssenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSteven N. LongmoreView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarManuel RienerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAdam K. LeroyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarErik RosolowskyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAdam GinsburgView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarCara BattersbyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarMélanie ChevanceView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSharon E. MeidtView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSimon C. O. GloverView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAnnie HughesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJouni KainulainenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarRalf S. KlessenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarEva SchinnererView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarAndreas SchrubaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarHenrik BeutherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarFrank BigielView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarGuillermo A. BlancView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarEric EmsellemView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarThomas HenningView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarCynthia N. HerreraView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarEric W. KochView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJérôme PetyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarSarah E. RaganView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarJiayi SunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in
                        PubMed Google ScholarContributionsJ.D.H., J.M.D.K. and S.N.L. were responsible for the experiment design. J.D.H. led the project, carried out the experiment, developed the analysis methods, interpreted the results and wrote the text, to which J.M.D.K, S.N.L. and M.R. contributed. E.R. created the mock datasets and designed the observational estimator 2D model test. J.D.H. and M.R. were responsible for data visualization. Supplementary Videos 1–5 were coproduced by J.D.H. Supplementary Videos 6–10 were produced by M.R. J.D.H. performed the spectral decomposition for all regions except for the GRS data for which M.R. was responsible. All authors contributed to aspects of the data reduction and analysis, the interpretation of the results, and the writing of the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to
                Jonathan D. Henshaw.
Ethics declarations|
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information|Peer review information Nature Astronomy thanks Mark Heyer and Alex Lazarian for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Extended data|Extended Data Fig. 1 Summary of the observations.Here we highlight the observations and region selection for the data presented in Figure 1. The scales probed by our Galactic disc selection (seen in square brackets) are relevant for a distance of 3 kpc. Out of each of these environments we select sub-regions for the statistical analysis presented in Fig. 2 (see Statistical analysis of the observational data).Extended Data Fig. 2 Maps of the regions selected for statistical analysis.The upper panels display our galactic disc environments. From left to right we show part of the main southern spiral arm in NGC 4321 (a), a GMC in the Galactic disc (b), and an individual filament located within that same GMC (c). The bottom panels display our selected regions in the CMZ: The series of molecular clouds investigated by ref. 13 (d) and an individual GMC located within the CMZ gas stream (e). The cyan points in panel ‘a’ refer to the locations of star forming complexes identified in the mid-infrared14. In the upper left of each panel we indicate the tracer used to create each image. Scale bars are included in the bottom right corner of each image. These regions correspond to the areas over which we perform our statistical analysis (see Statistical analysis of the observational data and Fig. 2).Extended Data Fig. 3 Distribution of our density proxy (top) and velocity centroids (bottom) along the crest of the structures displaying periodicity.From left to right we show distance along the crest of each structure versus mean density (top) and velocity (bottom), for our selected regions in NGC 4321 (a, b), the CMZ (c, d), and IRDC G035.39-00.33 (e, f), respectively (see Extended Data Fig. 2). The coloured shaded region in each panel represents the standard deviation of the data measured orthogonal to the crest.
                        Source data
Extended Data Fig. 4 A comparison between our density proxy and the line-of-sight velocity differential.Here we show the profile of our density proxy (coloured lines) with the normalised velocity differential (black line) along the crests of our our selected regions in NGC 4321 (a), the CMZ (b), and IRDC G035.39-00.33 (c), respectively. Note that in panel ‘b’ we show emission of N2H+ (1-0) rather than the column density distribution displayed in Extended Data Fig. 3c (see the discussion in the Supplementary Information). The black dotted line highlights where the derivative of the velocity is 0.0 kms−1 pc−1.
Supplementary information|Supplementary InformationSupplementary Figs. 1– 6, models and discussion.Supplementary Video 1Ubiquitous velocity fluctuations throughout the molecular interstellar medium. Here we show a movie highlighting the p-p-v structure of NGC4321. The data points are equivalent to those presented in Fig. 1a.Supplementary Video 2Equivalent to Supplementary Video 1, but for the Galactic Disk.Supplementary Video 3Equivalent to Supplementary Video 1, but for the G035.39-00.33.Supplementary Video 4Equivalent to Supplementary Video 1, but for the CMZ.Supplementary Video 5Equivalent to Supplementary Video 1, but for G0.253+0.016.Supplementary Video 6A movie highlighting the velocity fluctuations throughout NGC4321. Here we show the position-velocity location of data extracted using our spectral decomposition method for individual slices through the other position axis.Supplementary Video 7Equivalent to Supplementary Video 6, but for the Galactic disc. Here we show the full decomposition of the GRS data set and not just the region displayed in Fig. 1b and in Supplementary Video 2. This demonstrates that the velocity fluctuations are detected throughout the entire area covered by the GRS survey.Supplementary Video 8Equivalent to Supplementary Video 6, but for G035.39-00.33.Supplementary Video 9Equivalent to Supplementary Video 6, but for the CMZ.Supplementary Video 10Equivalent to Supplementary Video 6, but for G0.253+0.016.
Source data|
Source Data Fig. 2Source data for Fig. 2.Source Data Extended Data Fig. 3Source data for Extended Data Fig. 3.
Rights and permissions|Reprints and Permissions
About this article|Cite this articleHenshaw, J.D., Kruijssen, J.M.D., Longmore, S.N. et al. Ubiquitous velocity fluctuations throughout the molecular interstellar medium.
                    Nat Astron  (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-020-1126-zDownload citationReceived: 11 December 2019Accepted: 12 May 2020Published: 06 July 2020DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-020-1126-z