
Methods|Past cases of Kawasaki disease were reviewed from records of Hospital Papa Giovanni XXIII in Bergamo, Italy. Diagnostic criteria of Kawasaki disease includes: fever for more than 5 days; with non liquidy eye redness; changes of lips and mouth; swollen lymph nodes; rash; reddening of the palms and feet; and thickening and hardening of the hands and feet. They also looked at low red blood cells count, high platelet count, low albumin, high liver enzymes, high white blood cell count, white blood cells in the urine, aortic aneurysm, or other cardiac dysfunction. KDSS occurs when there is a drop in blood pressure and the body cannot get enough oxygen.The hospital records showed the blood work, EKG results, and whether the patient had come into contact with a COVID-19 positive person. The patients and their caregivers were tested by nasal swab and RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2. Some of the more recent patients were tested for IgG/IgM antibodies for COVID-19.Patients were given aspirin, intravenous immunoglobulin, and methylprednisolone. This is the typical treatment for Kawasaki disease.
Abstract|The purpose of this study is to discuss the effect of COVID-19 on the central nervous system (CNS). Databases were searched for relevant articles. Very little information is currently available. However, two studies provide documented data. The involvement of the central nervous system in COVOID-19 infections is largely unexplored and understudied. However, it is very likely that there is neurological involvement in severe patients. 
1. Introduction|Coronavirus primarily targets the respiratory systems, but it can invade the central nervous system as well. The symptoms of coronavirus appear in roughly 5 days. Mild patients have symptoms of headaches, cough, fever, and fatigue. In the most severe cases, patients can have pneumonia, multiorgan failure, and severe respiratory or cardiac issues. However, coronavirus infections are associated with neurological issues as well. Seizures, encephalitis, and changes in mental status have all been reported. Once the virus enters the body via the olfactory bulb it causes inflammation and demyelination. Demyelination causes the loss of a protective fatty layer that covers neurons. 
2. Methods| Databases were systematically searched for related articles. In various databases certain search words were used to acquire better results.
3. Results| Two articles were discovered that observed the involvement of COVID-19 with the central nervous system. One study found neurological conditions in 25 of patients. However, no specific tests were executed to further study the observation. 
5. Conclusion|Neurological involvement has not been studied appropriately yet. Despite this it remains to be highly likely that COVID-19 could infect the nervous system and cause more severe symptoms. Further data collection is required.   
Abstract|This goal of this study is to see if levels of Vitamin D affects case rate and mortality rate of COVID-19 in European countries. It was found that with higher levels of Vitamin D, the case rate and mortality rate were lower.
Background/aims|In many other respiratory tract infections, Vitamin D helps to prevent more serious complications. But COVID-19 may be different because the virus interacts with ACE2 to enter the cell. Calcitriol, which is a form of Vitamin D, increases the amount of ACE2. So, higher amounts of Vitamin D might suggest a higher risk of COVID-19 infection. Stil, the researchers think that Vitamin D will protect against COVID-19 since it has that effect in other respiratory infections.
Results|This study compared average Vitamin D levels with cases of COVID-19 and deaths caused by COVID-19 in European countries. High Vitamin D levels are associated with low case rate and low death rate.
Discussions|Vitamin D deficiency is defined by a level lower than 30nmol/L. The average values for the elderly population in Spain, Switzerland, and Italy are all under 30nmol/L. These countries have a high death rate in their elderly populations. Anyone worldwide can have a Vitamin D deficiency, but the levels naturally lower with age. Lifestyle and genetics also play a role in Vitamin D deficiency. This is why low Vitamin D trends are seen in different countries who eat different foods, have different activities, and have different genetics.To confirm that Vitamin D is protective against COVID-19, we can look at this relationship in other respiratory diseases. Though Vitamin D can increase ACE2 levels and could potentially increase the infection rate of COVID-19, Vitamin D plays a big role in the immune system. Vitamin D is necessary for some white blood cells to mature. It also plays a role in the body’s ability to detect infected cells. Finally, Vitamin D helps create some of the enzymes that are toxic and can help kill diseases.Even though SARS-CoV-2 uses ACE2 to enter the cells, studies have shown that higher levels of ACE2 actually protects against serious COVID-19 issues. In studies done on rodents, ACE2 has decreased rapidly in elderly rats compared to young and middle aged rats. ACE2 also decreased more in male rats than female rats.The data used in this study is limited because there are many other variables involved for every country like access to testing and social distancing measures. Future studies should be done to confirm that Vitamin D is protective against COVID-19.
Abstract|The transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through droplets is clear, but whether it can be transmitted through aerosols (airborne transmission) is not. This study investigated whether SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted through aerosols by measuring viral RNA in two Wuhan hospitals during the COVID-19 outbreak. The researchers found that levels of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in isolation wards and vented patient rooms was low, but higher in patients' toilet areas. SARS-CoV-2 levels were undetectable except in two areas prone to crowding. Some medical staff areas had high concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 RNA, but they decreased after strict sanitation measures were put into place. Although the infective potential of airborne SARS-CoV-2 is unclear, the researchers suggest that SARS-CoV-2 may be transmitted through aerosols. The findings suggest that room ventilation, open space, sanitation of protective wear, and disinfection of toilet areas can limit the concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in aerosols. More work is necessary to understand infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosols.
Methods|In this study, the authors sampled airborne SARS-CoV-2 at 30 sites in two hospitals and public areas in Wuhan. They quantified the number of SARS-CoV-2 in these samples using droplet digital PCR-based detection (ddPCR). The two hospitals were used exclusively for COVID-19 patient treatment. Renmin Hospital was designated for treating severe symptoms of COVID-19, while Fangcang hospital was a makeshift field hospital that treated patients with mild symptoms.There were three categories of sample locations: patient areas, coronary care units and patient ward rooms in Renmin Hospital, medical staff areas, and public areas.In these locations, three kinds of samples were collected: aerosol samples of total suspended particles; aerodynamic size-segregated aerosol samples to determine the size distribution (a curve that determines the amount of particles present in a sample according to size) of SARS-CoV-2; and aerosol deposition samples to determine the deposition rate (the rate at which particles attach to surfaces) of SARS-CoV-2.
Abstract|Scientists have found that the COVID-19 virus binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor to enter the cell. This study looks at how much ACE2 receptor is contained in the Central Nervous System (CNS) tissue. The ACE2 receptors in the CNS show if COVID-19 damages nervous tissue.
6. Conclusions and Future Directions|Though COVID-19 could cause fatal nervous tissue damage, the cause of most fatalities are from damage to the lungs, heart, or kidneys. But, understanding the role of COVID-19 in the nervous system could help improve treatment plans.      
Abstract|A certain chemical family known as flavonoids activate pathways that combat oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is the phenomenon in which an imbalance in oxidants and antioxidants leads to programmed cell death. The pathways that are activated are the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) and Nrf2. It is important to note that not all flavonoids are activators of these two pathways. NDGA, a chemical similar to flavonoids, was chosen in this study due to its strong ability to activate the Nrf2 and HIF pathway as well as its bioavailability and stability. NDGA had neuroprotective effects in the animal model of Parkinson’s Disease.
Abstract|Individuals with underlying medical conditions display a worse outcome after SARS-CoV-2 infection. This study looks at several underlying medical conditions and its effect on COVID-19 infections. Studies show that obese individuals are more likely to develop infections. The fat tissue serves as aviral reservoir, which makes it harder to control the infection. infection. Diabetic individuals show a higher rate of inflammatory conditions. Hypertensive individuals are treated with drugs to reduce blood pressure. These drugs often work through ACE2 and ARB receptors and are often inhibitors of ACE2 and ARB receptors. Use of these drugs can lead to increased production of ACE2 which is what SARS-CoV-2 uses for entry into the cell.People with obesity, diabetes, or hypertension have an uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Cytokines are a small and broad class of proteins involved with cellular signaling. This can lead to what is known as the cytokine-storm phenomenon. As there are no currently approved SARS-CoV-2 antiviral therapy, efforts should be placed upon controlling the inflammatory response. 
1. Introduction|Diabetes, hypertension, and other cardiovascular disease (CVD) are strongly related to higher risks of mortality and severity with COVID-19 infection. The fat cells in obese patients increased pro-inflammatory cytokines and proteins. This can generate chronic alterations in body chemistry. It is thought that SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV suppress antiviral IFN-gamma immune responses. In the late stages of infection this suppression causes a rapid increase in white blood cells. Neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages flood the body and release pro-inflammatory cytokines that can damage lung tissue.  According to genome sequencing, the human SARS-CoV-2 is 89 identical to bat SARS-like-CoVVZXC21. Analysis of all coronaviruses shows that bats acted as the primary transmission route of SARS-CoV-2 to humans. SARS-CoV-2 enters the cell in a similar way to SARS-CoV. Therefore, it is suggested that both use ACE2 receptors found in the lung tissue to gain entry to the cell. 
Abstract|Vaccine and therapeutic research is essential to curb the spread of SARS-CoV-2. The SARS-CoV-2 Spike (S) glycoprotein helps viruses enter cells. It is the main target of neutralizing antibodies, which bind to structures on viruses and prevent them from interacting with cells. In this study, the researchers describe multiple monoclonal antibodies, which are made by identical immune cells that are clones of a unique parent cell. These antibodies target SARS-CoV-2 and were identified from memory B cells of an individual who was infected with SARS-CoV in 2003. SARS-CoV is the virus that causes SARS, which had a major outbreak in 2003 and is related to SARS-CoV-2. One antibody found called S309 effectively neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV by engaging the S receptor-binding domain. The researchers used cryo-electron microscopy and binding assays to show that S309 recognizes an antigen that is conserved within sarbecoviruses, a family of coronaviruses that includes SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. Combining different antibodies with S309 enhanced SARS-CoV-2 neutralization, and could limit the emergence of resistant mutants. The results suggest that S309 and combinations of other antibodies with S309 could be used to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection or used after exposure to limit or treat severe COVID-19.
Abstract|Social media has rapidly grown as a medium to disperse information. The popularity of social media has led certain movements such as veganism to become more visible to the average person. This exposure helps veganism to become more accepted by the mainstream. Despite this there is a lack of research on how to properly manage a vegan diet for athletic causes. The researchers of this study reviewed applicable research papers regarding vegan diets. There is little data regarding sports nutrition specifically. Veganism can create nutritional challenges that need to be accounted for. The reviewed articles mention Sufficiency of energy, protein, vitamin B12, iron, zinc, calcium, iodine and vitamin D, and the lack of long chain fatty acids. However, these can all be managed with strategic food management and proper supplementation. The purpose of this paper is to show that an inclusive and healthy vegan diet can be created for athletes. Beta-alanine and creatine were suggested as supplements that could be of great use to vegans. However, empirical research is needed to observe the effects of these diets in athletes.
Background|Veganism is a form of vegetarianism that prohibits the consumption of any animal or animal product. The increased visibility of celebrities that abide by veganism suggests veganism could be more wide-spread accepted. However, poorly planned vegan diets can produce deficiencies in certain macronutrients (protein, n-3) and micronutrients( Vitamin B12 and D; iron, zinc, calcium, iodine). Vegan diets are even purported to have potential performance benefits due to the antioxidant(polyphenols), extra micro nutrients( vitamin C, E) and carbohydrate rich foods that aid in recovery. However, there are no studies that provide data on this subject. In order for a balanced diet basic dietary requirements must be met. In order for this to be applicable to athletes it must also be sufficient for their energy requirements. This is the aim of this research paper. The researchers wanted to provide practical recommendations for dieticians, coaches, or trainers who work with vegan athletes. Special attention will be given towards achieving proper macro/micro nutrients requirements for athletes.
Main Text|Information in this review has been gathered from a broad range of academic disciplines. In some instances, recommendations in this article have yet to be proved via empirical investigation.EnergyOmnivorous diets provide sufficient energy to most athletes. Very large athletes may have a harder time acquiring the proper caloric intake. On the other end is athletes with very low body weight who are at risk for developing low density bones as a result of their training and eating habits. Additionally high intensity training can reduce appetite along with various other factors such as hectic travel schedules.The consequence of not acquiring enough energy is far reaching. Potential loss of immune function, weight loss, and reduced muscle power and tone. Managing a proper diet can be difficult for those not a vegan diet. The harmful effects of an improper diet can be inflated by a diet that promotes early satiety. The vegan diet is rich in fibre and emphasizes raw foods. These all lead someone to early satiety when eating a meal, and can cause less calories to be ingested. This can lead to restricted macronutrient (protein) absorption. Having early satiety in meals is good for weight loss regiments, but can cause issues in athletes who require high calorie meals. However, increasing eating frequency and intake of energy dense foods such as seeds, oils, and nuts can be helpful to meet the caloric needs of the athlete. Careful monitoring of unwanted body mass fluctuations would help the athlete to better tailor their diet to their caloric needs.Macronutrients(1) Protein The general consensus is that athletes require more protein than non-athletes. Strength training athletes are recommended 1.6-1.7grams per kg of body mass per day, whereas endurance is recommended 1.2-1.4grams per kg of body mass per day. This is significantly more than the 0.8grams per kg of body mass per day recommended for non athletes. The role of protein in the human body is not obvious. The balance between Muscle Protein Breakdown (MPB) and Muscle Protein Synthesis (MPS) is known as Net Protein Balance (NPB). In order to build muscle an athlete must achieve elevated levels of MPS. This will promote recovery, adaption, and muscle building. However, in conditions where the athlete consumes less overall calories than normal they might still require elevated protein intake to preserve muscle mass. Vegan athletes however consume less protein than their omnivorous and vegetarian equivalents. Plant-based protein is often incomplete. It is missing essential amino acids, and contains significantly less Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAA) than their animal protein counterparts. The amino acid Leucine appears to be a trigger of recovery and (MPS). Evidence suggests that milk-based proteins might be superior to other protein sources at promoting MPS. This is thought to be due to the higher concentration of (BCAA). Similarly, it has been found that regular consumption of milk protein gives better muscle growth than the Soy-protein equivalent. The amino acids commonly missing from plant protein are lysine, methionine, isoleucine, threonine and tryptophan. Lysine is commonly absent from grain. However foods such as beans and legumes are rich in Lysine. Lysine can also be obtained from soy beans and lentils. BCAAs can be found in seeds, tree nuts, and chickpeas. The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND) recommend vegans/ vegetarians consume a variety of foods to meet their protein requirements. High protein foods are uncooked Pumpkin seeds, uncooked Lentils, uncooked black beans, raw almonds, tofu, oats, and Quinoa. At this time plant based protein supplements are less researched. Further research is required to understand the effects of animal protein supplementation in a vegan diet if protein acquisitions from wholefoods proves implausible.Protein DigestibilitySystems created to quantify a protein's digestibility both show that animal-derived protein scores higher than plant-based protein. Important plant-based protein sources such as rice, peas, and hemp score significantly lower than animal-derived. To compensate for the lower digestibility of plant-based protein it is advised that vegans consume a higher than recommended dose of protein. This would account for the decreased digestibility of the plant-based protein.(2) CarbohydrateVegan diets tend to be high in carbohydrates. It has been suggested that endurance athletes adopt vegan diets in order to meet their carbohydrate needs or to assist in weight management. In order to achieve more than required protein consumption it is recommended that vegans consume lentils, grains, pulses, and beans daily. The issue with this is that those foods are high in fiber and thus contribute significant bulk and increase the satiety signal. This leads to decreased intake and prolonged satiety feelings. For athletes with higher caloric needs this may prove to be ineffective. High fiber diets can also cause Gastrointestinal issues for some individuals. Therefore to meet this caloric intake it is recommended that vegan athletes consume foods such as rice, pasta, noodles, and buckwheat to meet their caloric intake.Carbohydrate Timing and SupplementationCarbohydrate doses can be scaled with respect to the intensity and duration of the athletic event. Generally, carbohydrates are vegan-friendly and their consumption is reasonable for vegan athletes. Alternatively, calcium fortified fruit juice as a liquid carbohydrate might serve two purposes. It can provide adequate carbohydrate requirements while meeting the calcium requirements simultaneously.(3) FatVegan diets are typically lower in saturated fats than omnivores. This is associated with less cardiovascular issues such as heart disease, hypertension, type II diabetes, excess cholesterol, or cancer. However, the harmful effects of fat consumption are not universally agreed upon. Lower fat consumption can have negative effects on testosterone production in males. Which might be of importance to athletes trying to maximize muscle growth. However, evidence has shown that vegan males do not have statistically significant lower levels of testosterone than omnivores. The relationship between athletic performance, hormones, and fats requires additional research. Attention should be paid to quantity and quality of consumed fats. Adequate consumption 0.5-1.5grams per kg of body mass per day is easily achievable for vegans by consumptions of oils, avacadods, nuts, and seeds.(4) ALA, EPA and DHAVegans do not eat marine life, thus they appear to consume less n-3 fatty acids. Vegans have overall lower levels of n-3 Fatty acids inside their blood. n-3 fatty acids are important for normal growth and development, cardiovascular health, immunity, and in chronic disease. n-3 fatty acids also increase nitric oxide production and improve heart function. n-3 fatty acids also contain anti-inflammatory properties, antithrombotic, antiarrhythmic, vasodilatory, antiproliferative properties. Both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids are essential and the n-3 (EPA) and n-6 (DHA) are under consumed by vegans. Thus vegans are encouraged to combine food sources of ALA with supplemental DHA from microalgae oil to optimize a vegan’s n-3 intake. Optimization of the vegan diet for n-3 intake is currently lacking at the time of this article's writing. However, recommendations of 1-2 grams per day of EPA and DHA in a 2:1 ratio have been suggested for athletes elsewhere.Micronutrients Proper micronutrient intake is crucial to all athletes. It has been recommended that special attention be given to Vitamin B12, iron, zin, calcium, iodine, and Vitamin D intakes.  (1) Vitamin B12 Animal and Dairy products contain large amounts of vitamin B12 (cobalamin). Therefore vegans are at increased risk of developing B12 deficiencies. There are no plant based sources of cobalamin. The only time cobalamin would be in a plant is if it was contaminated with manure from animal waste. Cobalamin is vital to nervous system function, metabolism, homeostasis, and DNA synthesis. Short term B12 deficiencies led to changes in blood cells and neurological issues. Long term B12 deficiencies can lead to irreversible neurological damage. Roughly 50 of vegans tested are low for B12 and 21 are considered very low. Surprisingly vegans who took B12 supplements did not have blood levels statistically different than vegans who didn’t take B12 supplements. Which indicates that supplements are not enough to achieve sufficient vitamin B12 levels. Sources suitable for vegans are breakfast cereals enriched with vitamin B12 and nutritional yeast. It is estimated that only 2 of Vitamin B12 supplements will be absorbed into the body. Vegans are advised to consume up to 6 ug per day of vitamin B12.(2) IronVegans and Vegetarians consume similar levels of iron as omnivores. Most likely due to consumption of whole-grains and legumes. However, the iron found in plant matter is in the non-haem form that is less useful to the body than the haem form that is found in animal matter. Vegan diets also commonly contain dietary inhibitors such as polyphenols tannin (found in coffee, tea, and coca) and phytates (found in whole grain and legumes). These inhibitors reduce the amount of iron absorbed from the diet into the body. Research has shown that male vegans tend to have sufficient iron stores, but female vegans do not. This can lead to anemia. Due to the iron type, and the presence of polyphenol inhibitors it is advised that vegans consume up to 1.8 times the normal recommended amount for omnivores. It has been suggested that high iron intakes cause other mineral interactions and cardiovascular issues. Vegan athletes should eat wholefood iron sources, reduce consumption of inhibitors, contain foods, and incorporate soaked, sprouted and/or fermented foods to their diets. Females with large menstrual loss may consider taking additional iron supplements(3) ZincZinc is vital for various enzymatic processes involving DNA. Zinc has similar absorption issues to iron. Some studies say that vegans do not need to pay special attention to increased consumption as the body adjusts to decreased zinc intake. While others suggest consuming 50 more zinc than recommended. Common sources of zinc are beans, whole grains, nuts, and seeds. Zinc should not be consumed at the same time as other supplemental forms of folic acid, iron, calcium, copper, or magnesium. Doing so will decrease the absorption of zinc. Multivitamins might not be enough to ensure the proper amounts of nutrients are absorbed. It is recommended that vegans consume zinc rich foods such as hemp, pumpkin seeds, and other grains, nuts and beans.(4) Calcium  Large amounts of Calcium are found in dairy products. Vegans have been shown to be at a higher risk of bone fracture due to decreased calcium intake. This can be especially problematic for growing children or teens. As with most nutrients the body can change the amount absorbed from a diet to better meet the body's needs. It is reported that protein rich diets do not promote calcium excretion. They actually work to increase calcium retention and bone metabolism. Calcium is necessary for blood clotting, nerve transmission, muscle stimulation, vitamin D metabolism, and maintaining bone structure. Vegan athletes should consume plant-based sources of calcium such as beans, pulses, and green vegetables to achieve 1000 mg per day. Broccoli, bok choy and kale are particularly high in calcium. Green vegetables such as spinach and arugula contain a compound that inhibits calcium absorption. Vegans athletes are also advised to eat calcium fortified foods if whole-foods are not plausible for their lifestyle.(5) Iodine Iodine is an essential element needed for physical and mental growth + development. It also plays a pivotal role in metabolism. Vegans eat either excessively large or small amounts of iodine depending on their diet choices. A study found that 80 of Slovakian vegans were iodine deficient. However, another study found that vegans consumed too much iodine from seaweed. Excessively high or low levels of iodine consumption can lead to thyroid dysfunction. Goitrogens, found in cabbage, cauliflower, and rutabaga decrease iodine utilization. Large amounts of these vegetables can cause thyroid dysfunction. However, cooking such foods tends to destroy most of the Goitrogens making this effect not likely. Iodine in seaweed has shown to be unreliable, which is why it is suggested that iodized table salt is a good solution for vegans. It can also be found in potatoes and cranberries.(6) Vitamin D Vitamin D is a fat soluble vitamin produced in the skin by contact with UV radiation. It is important for calcium absorption, bone health, and many physiological processes. It can be found in animal products and fortified foods but is mostly acquired from exposure to the sun. Dietary intake is required when sun exposure is not enough. There exist varying supplements with different degrees of absorption into the body. The optimal level of Vitamin D for athletes has yet to be researched properly.Supplements and Ergogenic Aids(1) Creatine Research shows that vegan/vegetarian diets reduce the creatine stored in muscles. Creatine is an organic acid synthesized in the body from an amino acid (arginine, glycine, and methionine). Meat, fish, and poultry all contain Creatine. Its performance enhancing effects are well studied. It increases short-term high-intensity exercise performance, muscle building, and maximum strength. Vegan athletes should consider creatine supplements to compensate for the reduced creatinine levels from their diet. Dosing creatine requires muscle saturation. Regimens for 20 grams per day for a week followed by 3-5 grams per day as maintenance. Athletes could also chose to take 3-5 grams per day for 4 weeks to achieve the same amount of muscle saturation(2) Beta Alanine  Meat and poultry are the main sources for beta-alanine in the diet. Supplementation has shown to increase muscle carnosine concentrations. Carnosine is protein found in skeletal muscle and the central nervous system. It is shown to lead to improvements in high-intensity exercise performance by getting rid of free radicals. The effectiveness of Beta-alanine supplementation has been confirmed in exercises that are longer than one minute. The effects below one minute remain unclear. Further research is needed to verify and explore its application.
Conclusions|In general vegan diets tend to be lower in calories, protein, fat, vitamin B12, n-3 fats, calcium, and iodine than omnivorous diets. However, vegan diets are higher in carbohydrates, fiber, micronutrients, phytochemicals, and antioxidants. With proper selection and attention to macro/micro nutrients a vegan diet can attain a good balance. Supplementation with creatine and Beta-alanine might offer performance benefits to vegans who already have lower levels. Further research must be done to understand the performance enhancing effects of Beta-alanine and creatine. However issues with digestibility must be addressed. Increasing the amount of macro/micronutrients might be a way to combat the issues with digestibility and absorption. The shortcomings of this study is that there is no direct research of veganism in sports. To circumvent this tissue information was gathered from varied sources and compiled. Inferences were made based upon available data. Therefore, many of the recommendations in this article require authentication. The researchers want this article to act as guidance and a catalyst for future research into this topic. The main strength of this review is its complete analysis of the variables. 
Abstract|Since SARS-CoV-2 is thought to have originated from bats, it is of significant importance that we observe the susceptibility of other animals as a potential transmission route. In this study the researchers investigate how susceptible ferrets and other animals that are in close contact with humans are to SARS-CoV-2. The researchers found that SARS-CoV-2 replicates poorly in dogs, pigs, chickens, and ducks. However ferrets and cats are not as resistant to infection as the other animals studied. Specifically, cats appear to be susceptible to airborne infection.
Abstract|COVID-19 is an acute respiratory tract infection. Understanding where exactly the SARS-CoV-2 virus replicates and infects within the body is important in trying to contain the virus. The paper reports, based on review of nine cases, that the SARS-CoV-2 virus can replicate in upper respiratory tract tissues. Active replication in the throat was confirmed by the presence of viral replicative RNA in throat samples. Significant amounts of virus can still be found in the sputum (phlegm) of patients even after symptoms disappear and antibodies develop.
Methods|Throat swabs of the nine patients were taken on the first day of the onset of COVID symptoms through the 28th day post onset. Viral load, or copies of SARS-CoV-2 RNA per swab, was measured after each swab. From day 1-5, the average viral load was 6.76x10^5 copies per swab, and after the fifth day, the average viral load was 3.44x10^5 copies per swab. Within 7 days of onset, infectious virus could be readily isolated (grown in culture) in swab and sputum samples, suggesting that the virus can replicate in upper respiratory tract tissues. The virus could not be isolated in any sample after 8 days of onset despite high viral loads. Despite symptoms declining for most patients after the first week, viral RNA could be detected in throat samples well into the second week, and sputum samples of most patients were positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA into the 3rd and 4th week, despite full disappearance of symptoms. Seroconversion, or the development of antibodies to the virus, occurred on average after 7 days of the onset of symptoms.
Abstract| Carotenoids are colored compounds produced by plants, fungi, and microorganisms. Pea aphids can appear in a red or green color, and the carotenoid torulene occurs only in red pea aphids. The aphid genome encodes multiple enzymes for carotenoid biosynthesis. These genes are derived from fungal genes, which have been integrated into the aphid genome and duplicated. A mutation of a certain region in the red aphid genome that encodes a single carotenoid desaturase results in a loss of forulene and red body color, meaning that aphids make their own carotenoids.
Abstract|The three proteins, Sar1p, Sec13p complex, and Sec23p complex, contribute to the synthesis of transport vesicles.The vesicles derive from the endoplasmic reticulum. Vesicle formation requires GTP. But, GMP-PNP, a nonhydrolyzable analog of GTP, can cause vesicle formation as well. But, GMP-PNP vesicles cannot target and fuse with the Golgi complex. All three proteins remain on the vesicles. Yet, GTP vesicles are functional. Sar1p dissociates from GTP vesicles, allowing for fusion. Thin section electron microscopy reveal a thick coat around the vesicles. The subunits of the novel coat are different from clathrin, another coat protein. Two proteins drive the budding cycle in similar ways. So, Barlowe et al. proposes to call these two coat structures COPI and COPII.
Abstract| Brain-machine interfaces (BMI) show promise to restore lost sensory or motor function. Similarly, they offer a potential treatment for a variety of neurological disorders. According to the researchers, BMI's have not been utilized by the populus. This is due to limitations in their physical design and ability to transmit information. This paper details Neuralinks first attempt at scalable high-bandwidth BMI. The researchers have built an array that uses small threads with at most 3072 electrodes per array across 96 threads. Each thread is inserted individually with submicron precision to avoid vasculature and enable targeting of regions in the brain. The electrode array is packaged into a small implantable device. The package is 23x18.5x2 mm3 and utilizes a single USB type C cable to provide full-bandwidth data streaming. The array is also capable of simultaneous recording and analysis of all 3072 electrodes. This system also achieved a spiking yield of up to 70 in long-term implanted electrodes. This approach to a BMI is unprecedented in its packaging density and scalability for clinical applications.
Introduction| Brain-machine interfaces show promise in helping people with a variety of clinical disorders. BMI’s with 256 electrodes have been used to allow control of a computer cursor, robotic limbs, and speech synthesizers. These demonstrate a proof of concept, but they are limited by an inability to record a large amount of neural input simultaneously. Noninvasive electrodes placed on the outside of the skull provide distorted results. They are only capable of averaging the activity of millions of neurons which makes them incredibly non-specific. Similarly, invasive electrodes placed on the skull can only measure the activity of thousands of neurons. They are also incapable of reading deeper brain activity.Microelectrodes are the standard technology for recording action potentials from neurons. No large-scale systems exist for implantation. This requires a system with high biocompatibility, safety, and longevity. Such a system would also need to be compact and low power to allow wireless operation. Current systems use rigid metals or semiconductors. Such a design permits deeper penetration into the brain, but can accelerate an immune response. It also limits its potential applications as certain portions of the brain can not be accessed due to vasculature.Here Neuralink uses an alternative approach. Flexible polymer probes have 32 electrodes per probe. Their greater flexibility and smaller size offer great biocompatibility. However, the increased flexibility creates issues with their insertion. The researchers used a robot to insert a large number of probes efficiently and independently across varying brain regions. Neuralinks system increased the amount of channels by a factor of 10. This system has three main portions: 1) ultra-fine polymer probes, 2) a neurosurgical robot, 3) and a custom high density electronic array. This system is designed for long-term implantation. It also permits full broadband streaming of the neuronal information. A proprietary neuronal spike-detection software was developed for high accuracy, low latency detection.
Threads| A custom process was devised to fabricate such delicate threads. The developed microfabrication process allows for easy and fast production of these threads. Each of the 96 threads contain 32 independent electrodes. The researchers have developed over 20 different types of threads each with three layers of insulation and two layers of conductors.
Robot| The insertion head contains six light modules each capable of illuminations with 405nm, 525nm, 650nm, or white light. The 405nm module allows the robot to visualize for alignment. The 525nm light in conjunction with stereoscopic cameras and specialized software allow for estimation of the surface of the brain surface. This complex setup allows for the robot to implant electrodes around previously identified microvasculature. This system has demonstrated an 87.1 insertion success rate over 19 surgeries. Small manual adjustments were made. This resulted in an unprecedented insertion rate of 29.6 electrodes per minute.
Electronics| The custom chip produced by Neuralink provides unparalleled signal amplification and digitization within an impressively small package. Their system rejects background noise, and digitizes the amplified signals to be streamed out of the unit for real time-processing. This system uses minimal power and takes up a fraction of the size of other systems. The researchers currently have two configurations. System A has better overall performance measures, but less channels for communication. System B has more channels but slightly worse performance. The data is then streamed to a computer for live data analysis.
Electrophysiology| System A and B were implanted into Long-Evans rats. System A was able to record 1344 of 1536 channels simultaneously. The exact channels can be changed according to what is desired. System B was able to record from all 3072 channels simultaneously. The use of the researchers custom online spike-detection software was instrumental in decreasing their systems energy usage, latency, size, and accuracy.
Discussion|The systems developed in this experiment serve two main purposes. First it is a research platform for use in rodents. Secondly it serves as a prototype of a human version used in clinical applications. The system is easily implantable and allows for rapid refinement. The next step is to modulate neuronal activity. This could potentially give the sense of touch back or allow movement of paralyzed individuals. The researchers system was designed to allow electrical stimulation through every channel, but it was not demonstrated in this paper. The researchers system offers distinct advantages over previous approaches. The size and composition of the probes is unparalleled in size and biocompatibility. Similarly, the ability to choose where the probes are placed allows greater flexibility and avoidance of vasculature. Finally, the system allows very high channel counts with a low power consumption and small packaging. In theory multiple systems could be readily implanted onto a human to interface with more neurons. Various technological improvements must be made before practical. This offers an unparalleled scalable prototype from which to move forward. This system shows the potential to offer paralyzed patients the ability to control a digital mouse or keyboard. Additionally it could feasibly be used to restore motor function. 
Abstract| Minority ethnic and black individuals appear to be disproportionately affected by low vitamin D levels and COVID-19 infection. This study aims to establish if blood levels of vitamin D are associated with COVID-19 infection risk. UK biobank recruited 502,624 participants aged 37-73 years. Exposure data and blood vitamin D levels were acquired. The data was then cross referenced. Complete data was available for 348,598 UK Biobank participants. Only 449 participants had confirmed COVID-19 infection. Once all variables were accounted for the data did not show any association between blood vitamin D levels or the effect of ethnicity on infection risk. The results do not support a link between blood vitamin D concentrations and risk of COVID-19 infection. The results also fail to observe ethnic differences in infection risk as a result of blood vitamin D levels.
1. Introduction|COVID-19 has led to a pandemic of pneumonia-related illness. The researchers predict the case fatality to be 1. According to the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre roughly one third of all reported cases are non-white. There is growing evidence that COVID-19 disproportionately affects minority ethnic and black individuals. The US has seen similar patterns of infection. Therefore, it is critical that we understand the relationship between COVID-19 and ethnic minorities. Several factors could lead to this trend. UK government statistics show that black or minority ethnic individuals tend to live in more socioeconomically deprived areas of England. Similarly, these groups tend to experience higher levels of underlying medical issues.One potential reason for this could be that ethnic minorities and black individuals tend to have lower levels of vitamin D. Vitamin D is produced in the skin and is a result of exposure to UV radiation. However, the melanin in darker skin will absorb less UV radiation. This results in less vitamin D production. This study hypothesized that blood vitamin D concentrations were associated with COVID-19 risk among UK Biobank participants.
4. Results|The median blood vitamin D concentration was lower in patients who had confirmed infection than those without infection. However, after adjusting for various other factors such as SES, health, BMI, and race there was no relation between vitamin D concentration and COVID-19 infection. There was no statistically significant interaction between vitamin D and ethnicity. Median blood concentrations of vitamin D were highest in white individuals and lowest in South Asian participants There is higher risk found for males and individuals who BMI classifies them as obese. 
5. Discussion|This study was consistent with others in showing a higher infection risk to black and ethnic minority groups. No association was found between blood vitamin D concentration and COVID-19 infection as adjusting for variables. Blood vitamin D concentrations were lower in black and minority ethnic individuals. Despite this, there is no evidence it causes a higher risk to COVID-19 infection. Further studies are required to determine potential biological mechanisms that may vary between ethnic and black individuals. The difference in infection risk could be social factors or cardiometabolic conditions.This study failed to find an association between blood pressure and infection risk. Similarly, there was no observed risk for smokers. However, the literature on the effects of smoking is still mixed at this current time. This study was large, but not representative of the general population. This study finds no link between blood vitamin D concentration and COVID-19 infection risk. Similarly, the results of this study suggest that vitamin D supplements are unlikely to provide assistance in prevention.
6. Conclusion|The results of this study do not provide evidence to support a role regarding blood vitamin D concentration on COVID-19 infection. Nor, does blood vitamin D concentration explain differences between ethnic groups. 
Abstract|Oxidative stress can lead to Alzheimer’s disease (AD), among other disorders. Oxidative stress is when there is a buildup of highly reactive free-radicals in the body. These free-radicals can lead to cell death through apoptosis. Carnosic Acid (CA) is a chemical found in rosemary and sage that can combat oxidative stress in its active form. The active form of CA stimulates the Nrf2/Keap1 pathway. The Nrf2/Keap1 pathway produces antioxidants which can neutralize the free radicals which, in-turn, prevents cell death.Both in vivo and in vitro studies were conducted. Mouse models of AD were treated with CA transnasally twice weekly for 3 months and tested on their neuronal capacity. The in vitro studies were done on rat neurons. Both studies showed positive results in response to the CA treatment.
Main|AD is an increasingly prevalent disease among the elderly population. The loss of synapses accompanied by neuronal loss leads to cognitive decline in AD patients. This neuronal damage is caused primarily by oxidative and nitrosative stress. Oxidative stress is caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitrosative stress is caused by reactive nitrogen species (RNS).Many studies have shown the potential of the Nrf2/Keap1 pathway in combating oxidative and nitrosative stress especially in neurodegenerative diseases. This study tested the efficacy of a known Nrf2/Keap1 pathway activator in AD mouse models.Electrophilic compounds react with the Keap1 leading to the Nrf2 to be released into the cytoplasm. The Nrf2 then moves to the nucleus of the cell where it binds to the antioxidant response element (ARE) promoter region. The problem with electrophilic drugs is that they may have reverse effects. The antioxidants that are produced by the electrophilic drugs may be used to combat the electrophilic drug instead of the target reactive species. The use of pro-electrophilic drugs is a strategy to overcome the previously stated obstacle. Pro-electrophiles are activated in environments of oxidative stress. This makes pro-electrophiles innocuous in normal environments. Carnosic acid is a naturally occurring pro-electrophile.
Results|1. CA treatment ameliorates amyloid-beta-induced spine loss in cultured rat cortical neurons:For in vitro study, dendritic spines of rat embryos were treated with amyloid-beta (AB) to simulate AD. Treatment with AB showed a significant decrease in dendritic spine density when compared to the control. However, CA treatment along with the AB exposure reduced the damage to the dendritic spines.2. CA treatment rescues deficits in spatial learning in hAPP-J20 AD mice:The mice were also tested for their spatial learning. A Morris water maze was used to evaluate the mice’s spatial learning ability. The hAPP-J20 mice (the mice modeling AD) took a significantly longer time in the maze as compared to the wild type mice. On the first day of training, the hAPP-J20 mice with CA treatment took a significantly longer time than the wild type mice. However, on the third day of training, these mice took a similar amount of time as compared to the wild type mice.3. CA Treatment rescues dendritic loss in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by the number of MAP2-positive cells:The next evaluation involved four groups: wild-type control, wild-type CA, J20-control, and J20-CA. In this evaluation, the level of MAP2 signaling was tested. MAP2 signaling is correlated with dendritic loss in mice. Both the wild-type control and the wild-type CA showed robust MAP2 signaling whereas the J20-control lacked MAP2 signaling. J20-CA showed similar MAP2 signaling as both the wild-type groups. This indicates that CA treatment can rescue dendritic loss in hAPP-J20 mice.4. CA Treatment rescues synaptic loss in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by synaptophysin staining:To evaluate how CA impacts synaptic levels in hAPP-J20 mice, quantitative confocal immunohistochemistry by the synaptophysin antibody was performed. The J20-control mice showed significantly lower synaptic activity as compared to the wild-type mice. The J20-CA mice, on the other hand, showed similar synaptic activity as the wild-type mice. This shows that synaptic loss in hAPP-J20 mice can be rescued by CA treatment.5. CA Treatment decreases astrocytosis in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by the number of GFAP-positive cells:A similar approach as the previous experiment was used to test the effect of CA treatment on gliosis in hAPP-J20 mice. Gliosis is when the body creates an abnormal amount of glial cells (cells that support nerve cells). This can lead to scars developing in the brain. This experiment found that treatment with CA can prevent gliosis in the hippocampus of hAPP-J20 mice.6. CA Treatment reduces amyloid accumulation in hAPP-J20 mouse brain, as reflected by AB immunohistochemistry:In vitro studies have demonstrated the efficacy of CA in the presence of AB. However, this study is the first to prove similar efficacy in vivo. Similar to the last two experiments mentioned, immunohistochemistry was performed to evaluate the AB levels in each group. Both wild-type groups showed undetectable levels of AB whereas the J20-control group showed high levels of AB. The J20-CA group showed significantly reduced levels of AB demonstrating CA’s efficacy in suppressing AB in vivo.7. Effects of CA treatment on 3xTg AD mouse brain:3xTg is another mouse model for AD. Similar experiments were performed on the 3xTg mice as the hAPP-J20 mice to generalize the results. The findings from the 3xTg mice were similar to those of the hAPP-J20 mice. Additionally, 3xTg mice have been reported to have increased levels of p-tau. CA treatment reduced the p-tau levels in 3xTg mice. The results from the hAPP-J20 mice combined with the results from the 3xTg mice demonstrates the general efficacy of CA in AD.
Discussion|There is strong potential for pro-electrophilic drugs (PEDs) like CA in neurodegeneration recovery. PEDs activate the Nrf2/Keap1 pathway without depleting antioxidants. Additionally, CA crosses the blood-brain barrier in neuroprotective concentrations making delivery of the drug much easier.This study has demonstrated the effectiveness of PEDs in in vivo models of AD, unlike any previous study. This study, with the use of immunohistochemistry, showed that CA improves histological damage in the hippocampus of two different AD mouse models.Though CA has been shown to activate numerous transcriptional pathways, there is strong evidence supporting the role of Nrf2 activation in the protection seen in this study.
Abstract|This is a phase three clinical trial in which the authors of this paper are testing the outcomes of giving the antibody, ipilimumab, to patients who had stage III melanoma tumors successfully removed. The dose of ipilimumab in this trial is 10 mg per kg of body weight. The patients examined in this study were randomly assigned to receive either ipilimumab or placebo. The survival, recurrence rates, and distant metastasis rates of these two groups were measured about 5.3 years after the start of each patient’s treatment. The authors found that there was a greater rate of survival and less distant cancer spread among the treatment group, but more adverse immune effects.
IntroductionIpilimumab,|Ipilimumab is an antibody that can strengthen immune responses against tumors. In 2011, the FDA allowed for 3 mg per kg of body weight of the antibody to be given to patients with advanced melanoma, a skin cancer. A clinical trial showed that at a dose of 10 mg per kg of body weight, the antibody was more effective in treating patients with advanced melanoma, but the antibody was also more toxic at this level. After receiving these results, the authors of this paper conducted another clinical trial. In this trial, they tested how effective ipilimumab was in treating melanoma patients who had their cancer surgically removed, but had a high chance of having it recur. They followed up with each of the patients after about 2.7 years after the start of their cancer remissions. They found that the patients who received the antibody had longer recurrence-free survival times. In this paper, the authors report the outcomes of these same patients after about 5.3 years after the start of their cancer remissions. This will provide a sense of how effective ipilimumab is in combating melanoma recurrence.
Methods|PatientsPatients that were examined in this study were all 18 and older and had melanoma that had spread to regional lymph nodes.Trial Design and RegimenPatients resided in a wide range of hospitals across 19 countries. They were separated into experimental groups based on their country and stage of melanoma. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either ipilimumab at 10 mg per kg of body weight or a placebo. Once a patient’s cancer went into remission, they would receive one dose every 3 weeks for 12 weeks, then one dose every three months until their cancer recurred.AssessmentsAll the patients in the study were tested for cancer recurrence and spread once every 3 months for three years, then once every 6 months after that. “Recurrence free survival” is the duration between the start of cancer remission and either recurrence or death.Trial OversightThis trial was approved by the EORTC protocol-review committee and several ethics committees. This trial was funded and sponsored by Bristol-Myers Squibb.Statistical AnalysisThe authors discuss here the parameters they used in the statistical analyses they performed in this study.
Results|Patients and Trial RegimenA total of 951 melanoma patients were studied in this trial. Half received ipilimumab and the other half received placebo. Of the patients who received the antibody, 53.3 stopped treatment because of an adverse event, with most of these events being drug-related. Meanwhile, only 4.6 of the placebo group stopped because of an adverse event. 28.7 of patients in the treatment group stopped treatment because of cancer recurrence compared to 59.5 of patients in the placebo group. 13.4 of the treatment group were able to receive treatment for 3 years without stopping compared to 30.2 of the placebo group. The latest follow-up for each patient was about 5.3 years after their cancers initially went into remission.Efficacy and Post Protocol TreatmentThe average rate of recurrence-free survival at five years among the treatment group was 40.8, compared to 30.3 in the placebo group. The average survival rate at five years among the treatment group was 65.4 in the treatment group compared to 54.4 in the placebo group. The average rate of survival without distant cancer spread at five years was 48.3 for the treatment group and 38.9 for the placebo group.Safety98.7 of the patients who received ipilimumab suffered an adverse event of some kind, with a little over half of these events being of higher severity. On the other hand, 91.1 of patients in the placebo group suffered an adverse event of some kind, with a little over a quarter of these events being of higher severity. Immune system-related adverse events were more frequent in the treatment group. 41.6 of patients in the treatment group suffered an immune-related adverse event of high severity compared to 2.7 in the placebo group. A total of 1.1 of patients in the treatment group died from complications that were caused by ipilimumab.
Discussion|Treating melanoma patients after remission with ipilimumab is linked to longer overall survival and reduced chance of long-distance spread if the cancer recurs. This benefit was consistent even when factoring in different geographic regions and cancer stages. However, ipilimumab has a high risk of causing other adverse health effects. This clinical trial has extended and added to the trial on ipilimumab the authors had conducted previously.
Abstract|The embryo of the common fruit fly (Drosophilia) develops based on a body plan that is set by maternal-effect genes, which are expressed in the mother. In this paper, the nos protein produced by the maternal-effect gene nanos is found to be necessary for the abdomen to form. In addition, if nos is not produced, blocking the maternal-effect gene hunchback can restore the abdomen. These results suggest that the nos gene product blocks the activity of the gene product hb of maternal hunchback.
Abstract|Braun et al. tested the effect of cytokeratin-positive cancer cells on the development of breast cancer. The authors extracted bone marrow aspirates from the upper iliac crests of patients, with stage I, II, or III breast cancer, who had the tumor removed. Bone marrow aspirates were also extracted from non-cancerous controls. The aspirates were stained with a monoclonal antibody, A45-B/B3, which is bound to antigens on cytokeratins. Follow up appointments ranged from 10-70 months and the end goal was survival. Cytokeratin-positive cells were found in the bone marrow of one percent of the controls and thirty-six percent of the patients with breast cancer. Braun et al. found that the presence of occult metastatic cells in bone marrow was unrelated to that of lymph-node metastasis. 49 patients out of the 199 patients with occult metastatic cells died of cancer, whereas out of the 353 patients without such cells, 22 died of cancer-related causes. Out of 301 women without lymph-node metastases, 100 had bone marrow micrometastases. 14 of the 100 died of cancer-related causes, as did 2 of the 201 without bone marrow micrometastases. These results show that the presence of occult cytokeratin-positive metastatic cells in bone marrow increases the risk of relapse in patients with breast cancer.
IntroductionThe|It is important to track the early spreading of cancer cells because this is one of the biggest causes of relapse and death. These cells influence the spread of cancer in patients. The presence of ectopic epithelial cells in the bone marrow was shown to influence the development of patients with colorectal, gastric, and non–small-cell lung carcinomas, tumors. In breast cancer, antibodies against antigens of the polymorphic epithelial mucin family have been used to identify ectopic epithelial cells. Results from a study of 49 patients showed that cytokeratin-specific antibodies were able to detect breast-cancer micrometastases from bone marrow smears. This prompted Braun et al. to study a defined number of bone marrow cells, and a monoclonal antibody against an antigen shared by various cytokeratin peptides. The results of Braun et al.’s study demonstrates that cytokeratin-positive cells in bone marrow are indeed tumor cells.
Methods|From January 1994 to December 1997, the I. Frauenklinik at Ludwig Maximilians University in Munich and the Zentralklinikum in Augsburg, Germany, studied 743 patients. These patients had bone marrow aspirates taken from both upper iliac crests before removing the cancer. Braun et al. used this method to examine the bone marrow obtained from 552 patients with stage I, II, or III breast cancer. Of the 552 patients with breast cancer, 298 patients went through breast conservation 254, modified radical mastectomy. All patients had the tumor removed. Out of the patients treated with breast-conserving surgery, 298 received radiation therapy. 72, of the 170 postmenopausal women with node-positive breast cancer (with estrogen-receptor–positive tumors) received 20 to 30 mg of tamoxifen daily. Both premenopausal and postmenopausal patients with estrogen-receptor–negative tumors were treated with chemotherapy.The base-line diagnostic evaluation for distant metastases, at the time of primary surgery, included plain chest radiography, mammography of the contralateral breast, ultrasonography of the liver, and bone scanning of the entire body. Patients were met with clinical examinations every three months after surgery and were only tested further if they showed any symptoms.Braun et al. obtained bone marrow samples from the upper iliac crests of the patients by needle aspiration. during primary surgery and stored in heparin-treated tubes.The authors screened 2×106 cells by bright-field microscopy. All slides they produced were examined separately by two different observers who agreed on the results for over 95 percent of specimens.Braun et al. used monoclonal antibody A45-B/B3 to find tumor cells in cytospin preparations of bone marrow. The authors used the breast-cancer cell line BT-20 as a positive control for cytokeratin immunostaining and they used the log-rank test to compare the patients with bone marrow micrometastases against those without micrometastases. Braun et al. used Cox proportional-hazards analysis to estimate the effect of various variables on the development of the disease, and they used the chi-square test to compare categorical variables. Finally, for statistical analyses, the authors used SPSS software for Macintosh.
Results|199 of the 552 patients, who had bone marrow aspirates taken, had cytokeratin-positive tumor cells in the bone marrow at the time of the initial resection of the primary tumor. In the majority of the specimens, occult cells were present as dispersed single cells and the frequency of occult metastatic cells was low. Bone marrow aspirates from the 191 controls were also analyzed before the final result was disclosed. Stained cytokeratin-positive cells were detected in only two of the 191 patients.58 percent of the patients had primary tumors that were no more than 2 cm in diameter. Primary tumors that were larger than 2cm were more likely to have a higher count of micrometastases. Of the 43 patients with stage pT4 tumors, 19 had inflammatory breast cancer; of the 19, 15 had occult metastatic cells in the bone marrow. Twenty-three percent of patients with stage pT1a tumors, 35 percent of patients with stage pT1b tumor, and 30 percent of patients with pT1c tumors had occult disease.Braun et al. found that the incidence of bone marrow micrometastases was similar in patients with lymph-node metastasis and those without it.After a 10 to 70 month range of follow-ups, 135 patients experienced a relapse of the tumor. 28 of the 135 patients had a locoregional relapse, and 107 had distant metastases. Locoregional relapses were not associated with the presence of micrometastases in bone marrow; however, distant metastases were.49 patients with occult metastatic cells, out of 199, died of cancer-related causes. On the other hand, out of 353 patients without occult tumor cells in the marrow, only 22 died of breast cancer. 14 patients died of cancer-related causes out of 100 patients with node-negative cancer and micrometastases. However, only 2 patients died of cancer-related causes out of the 201 patients without micrometastases. Braun et al. found no significant difference in survival between patients with node-negative cancer who had micrometastases and patients with node-positive cancer who did not have micrometastases.Braun et al. analyzed 245 patients with node-negative cancer who didn’t receive adjuvant therapy separately due to the possibility of locoregional relapse and distant metastasis being influenced by adjuvant treatment. 81 of the 245 had occult metastatic cells. Of the patients, who didn’t receive Adjuvant therapy, the risk of cancer-related deaths was higher of the 81 patients with micrometastases rather than of the 164 without micrometastases.The authors found that bone marrow micrometastasis, estrogen receptors, and lymph-node metastasis were each independent predictors of both recurrence with distant metastases and cancer-related death through a Cox multiple-regression analysis.
Discussion|Braun et al.’findings support the view that different pathways of tumor-cell dissemination cause distinct patterns of metastasis this is supported by the studies which found no concordance between the presence of lymph-node metastasis and the presence of bone marrow micrometastases.
Abstract|Trauma manifests in many behavioral and psychological disturbances in children and adults alike. These manifestations, however, do not always allow for a diagnosis of PTSD by clinicians. Of particular interest are the problems that result from early traumatic experiences with relationships. Such experiences can lead to disturbances in how one interprets social information, defines oneself, emotions, and memory. They can also result in the manifestation of physical symptoms without traceable cause(s). This raises important considerations into the nature of diagnostic criteria for PTSD.
Abstract|The aim of this article is to review the prognosis and existing treatments for co-occurring PTSD and Substance-Use Disorder (i.e., Alcohol Use Disorder). PTSD and substance-use disorder (SUD) often occur together (25-50 in clinical populations), spelling out worse outcomes for patients and more challenges for clinicians.
SARS-CoV-2 and ACE2|Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) plays a crucial role in heart function. Additionally, ACE2 has been identified as a functional receptor for SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses. SARS-CoV-2 binds to ACE2 thereby triggering the SARS-CoV-2 infection. ACE2 is highly expressed in both the heart and lungs. ACE2 is secreted more in patients with cardiovascular disease (CVD) as compared to healthy individuals. This can, in-turn, lead to respiratory symptoms. Because increase in ACE2 levels can lead to the fatal respiratory symptoms seen in COVID-19, ACE inhibitors may show positive outcomes and should be considered as a therapy.
Acute cardiac injury|A coronavirus with similar pathogenicity to SARS-CoV-2, Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV), can cause acute myocarditis and heart failure. Of the first 41 patients with SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan, 5 had myocardial injury. Of the 5 patients that experienced myocardial injury, 4 were admitted into the ICU. This indicates the prevalence of myocardial injury in COVID-19. In another sample of 138 patients in Wuhan, 36 patients were admitted into the ICU. The levels of biomarkers of myocardial injury were higher in these 36 patients as compared to the other COVID-19 patients. This indicates a correlation between myocardial injury and serious symptoms.Many of the patients first went to see doctors about their cardiovascular symptoms such as heart palpitations and chest tightness. These patients were later diagnosed with COVID-19. Even people who died from COVID-19 without underlying CVD showed significant heart damage. This shows that patients with COVID-19 are likely to experience cardiovascular symptoms caused by COVID-19 progression.
Chronic cardiovascular damage|A 12-year follow-up survey of 25 patients who had recovered from SARS-CoV showed that 68 had hyperlipidemia, 60 had glucose metabolism disorders, and 44 had cardiovascular system abnormalities. Additionally, metabolomics analysis showed that patients with a history of SARS-CoV had lipid metabolism dysregulation. The mechanism by which SARS-CoV infection leads to glucose and lipid metabolism disorders is unclear. However, because SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV have similar structures, healthcare professionals should give attention to cardiovascular protection in COVID-19 patients.
Patients with pre-existing CVD|A meta-analysis showed that patients with underlying CVD were at a higher risk for MERS-CoV infection. In patients with MERS-CoV and severe symptoms many had hypertension, diabetes, and heart disease. Regarding SARS-CoV-2, elderly people with hypertension, coronary heart disease, or diabetes were more likely to be infected. Among patients with severe symptoms from COVID-19, many had hypertension, heart disease, and arrhythmia.In addition to preexisting CVD, healthcare professionals should be aware of the cardiovascular effects of treatments given to COVID-19 patients. Most patients with COVID-19 were given antiviral drugs, however, these drugs can cause cardiovascular disorders.
Conclusions|SARS-CoV-2 likely infects cells through ACE2 to cause COVID-19. Though the primary manifestation of COVID-19 is respiratory related, there is strong evidence linking COVID-19 and cardiovascular disorders. Additionally, patients with underlying CVD are at a higher risk of developing severe symptoms.
Abstract|The Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes Consortium has identified somatic mutations that represent a profile of characteristic signatures. The size of the curated dataset makes this discovery of mutation signatures the most comprehensive dataset yet. Estimated contributions of characteristic signatures for each cancer type can be associated with causes of cancer that originate in the body or from the environment.
Discussion|Signatures extracted from whole genomes are considered mathematical approximations. Variation and nuances of signature profiles exist which are not fully captured in the signature representation. The majority of naturally occurring signatures in human cancer have been described. Further research into location and time based mutations as part of mutation signatures can expand knowledge of cancer initiation and detection.
Methods|SigProfiler is a framework that deconstructs whole cancer genomes into signature profiles through a two-step matrix factoring approach. SigProfiler is the successor to SignatureAnalyzer. 23, 829 cancer genomes were analyzed by SigProfiler. The method was manually fine tuned to reflect biologically plausible circumstances observed in previous DNA damage and repair literature. 
Abstract|Pain comes from sensory input as well as situational context from the brain. Research has associated pain with neuronal oscillations (brain waves) at different frequencies. This paper looks to compile information on how the different frequencies of these oscillations and prediction come together to make the experience of pain.
Abstract|Tree growth was investigated in Isle Royale National Park in Michigan to reveal the influence of herbivores and carnivores on plants in an intimately linked food chain. Plant growth rates were regulated by the amount of certain types of animals present (moose and wolves), and the plants only responded to annual changes in primary productivity when they were no longer under pressure from moose. The study revealed top-down control in the Isle Royale ecosystem.
Abstract|The purpose of this article is to investigate the effects of ACEI/ARB on COVID-19 patients. Theoretically, ACEI/ARB should help COVID-19 patients similarly to SARS-CoV patients, but many major cardiology scientific associations have denied this. This study concludes that an association between ACEI/ARB and positive effects on COVID-19 patients is not supported. This may change in the future, however.
Introduction|SARS-CoV-2 is similar to SARS-CoV and MERS. Studies show the virus binding to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors, allowing it to replicate and transport through the lungs. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) are medicines that block ACE2 receptors, protecting against infection.
Background|ACE2 receptors act to counter-regulate renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) activation. RAAS is a hormone system involved in regulating blood pressure and fluid and electrolyte balance. The RAAS system has a major role in people suffering from diabetes, hypertension, or heart failure. ACEI and ARB (angiotensin II receptor blocker) drugs are often used to help with these conditions (i.e., hypertension and heart failure).	
COVID-19 and Comorbidity|Hypertension and diabetes are major risk factors for infection and poorer outcomes of COVID-19. Studies have not combined ACEI use with COVID-19 patients showcasing hypertension and/or diabetes. ACEI use has not been shown to affect COVID-19 outcomes. SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS all show a common association with damaging cardiac events.
Pros and Cons of ACE Inhibition|ACE2 receptors may be involved with cardiac events associated with SARS-CoV-2. Drugs that increase activity at ACE2 receptors may increase the risk of infection and worse outcomes in COVID-19 patients. ACEI may inadvertently lead to ACE2 upregulation, which would allow SARS-CoV-2 to bind to more sites and increase infection. This has been seen with COVID-19 patients taking ACEI or ARB drugs for hypertension or diabetes. Other investigators have argued that using ACEI actually disrupts ACE2 pathways, then decreasing ACE2 production and decreasing the likelihood of SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, no causal relationship between ACEI use and decreased risk for death has been established. Cardiology associations have urged those using ACEI/ARB medications to continue using them while infected with COVID-19.
Conclusions|More research is needed regarding the relationship between ACEI use and COVID-19 outcomes. There is not enough evidence to support halting ACEI use as they still help with hypertension and diabetes, so COVID-19 patients already using them should continue to do so. 
Abstract|The authors investigated the efficacy of empowerment self-defense (ESD) in reducing the prevalence and risk of sexual violence (primary outcomes) among adolescent girls in Malawi. ESD’s effect on confidence, knowledge on self-defense, and disclosure about violence was also investigated. The results supported the hypothesis that ESD would reduce the primary outcomes and improve secondary outcomes. ESD is effective in reducing sexual violence; thus, implementation into education systems is advocated.
Methods|151 schools with 7,832 participants were enrolled in the study, with student to ESD instructor ratio being 20:1. Ultimately, 72 experimental schools (2195 participants) and 69 control schools (2083 participants) were followed up for analysis.IMPower intervention activitiesIMPower includes weekly (6 in total) 2 hours sessions of empowerment self-defense training. It emphasizes boundary testing/setting (i.e., warning about harmful behaviors), negotiation and diffusion tactics, and verbal assertiveness, with physical violence being the last resort.Control condition activitiesControls were instructed in the standard Malawi LifeSkills program. This 2 hour program consisted of teaching about adolescent health topics (e.g., puberty, hygiene, STIs, and menstruation).Supporting sexual violence survivors: The SASA ProgramIMPower participants who disclosed sexual violence were referred to the Sexual Assault Survivors Anonymous program, a weekly support group with the goal of healing.
Results|Individual baseline characteristicsThe average age for primary and secondary school students was 15.28 and 19.55, respectively. 16 of primary school girls and 26 of secondary school girls had reported ever having been forced to have sex. Forced sex victimization in the past year was reported at 10 and 18 for primary and secondary school girls respectively. Of girls who reported forced sex, 49 of girls in primary schools reported only one incident, whereas 63 of girls in secondary school reported multiple incidents.Primary outcomesBaseline rates of past-year and overall incident rates of sexual violence were around the same for the control and intervention groups (~14 for past-year and ~19.5 for overall). ESD resulted in significant reductions in the rates of sexual violence (9.2 at follow up and trending down), whereas the control group led to steady incident rates that trended upwards.Secondary Outcomes (Intervention v. Control)Confidence in self-defense:Baseline: 41.2 vs. 26.2Increased by: 1.33 v. 1.26Knowledge in self-defense:Baseline: 15 v. 7Increased by: 3.33 (threefold) v. 1.27Sexual violence disclosure:Baseline: 73 v. 68.2Increased to: 83.7 v. 74.8The pattern of primary and secondary outcomes was consistent among primary and secondary school girls.Skills mixWithin the ESD group, 43 had reported using the learned skills to stop forced sex since completing the training, with 52 using them more than once. 49, 13, and 38 of those who used the skills employed verbal only, physical only, or both respectively.
Discussion|Results support the implementation of a school-based empowerment self-defense program for reducing the risk and prevalence of sexual violence among primary and secondary school girls in Malawi. There was no significant effect from the intervention on self-defense confidence, so the minor increase may be due, in part, to natural maturation. The authors’ measures may have also been insufficiently sensitive to capturing ESD intervention effects.Most of the perpetrators of sexual violence for this population were known to victims, with boyfriends being the most common. More research into how ESD intervention may affect different groups of perpetrators is warranted. 
Abstract|Studies have shown that the 2019-nCoV virus primarily infects host cells with the ACE2 receptor. This receptor allows the virus to enter the host cell. Using RNA sequencing data, the researchers found that many cells in the oral mucosa (mucous membrane) express ACE2. Many receptors were specifically found in the epithelial cells of the tongue. This indicates that cells in the oral cavity are possibly at high risk for 2019-nCoV infection.
Introduction|Many patients have gotten Coronavirus Disease 19 (COVID-19) since December 2019. They experienced pneumonia, fatigue, respiratory failure, and other complications. The 2019-nCoV virus has a receptor binding domain (RBD) is similar to that of SARS-CoV. The study Zhou et al. showed that 2019-nCoV primarily infects cells through the angiotensin-converting enzyme II (ACE2) receptor. Other receptors are not used. The study Xu et al. showed that the spike protein interacts with human ACE2. The spike protein (S protein) is responsible for virus binding to the host receptor. Therefore, cells with a high number of ACE2 receptors may have a high risk of coronavirus infection.
Results|In Figure 1, the researchers show that many organs express ACE2. These organs include the intestine, kidney, colon, gallbladder, and heart muscle. When examining the oral cavity, they found high ACE2 expression in the tongue, floor of the mouth, and the base of the tongue. The tongue had the most ACE2 expression, but this difference was not significant compared to other sites in the mouth. The analysis came from the public RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) databases.	Researchers conducted RNA sequencing on many cells, including epithelial cells, T cells, and fibroblasts. Out of the ACE2 positive cells in the mouth, 95.86 came from the tongue rather than the cheek or gums. Most of the ACE2 positive cells were epithelial cells. But, T cells, B cells, and fibroblasts were also ACE2 positive (Figure 2). Thus, the epithelial cells of the tongue have the highest concentration of the ACE2 receptor.
Discussion|An interesting result is that lymphocytes in the oral mucosa had ACE2 receptors. The lungs and the digestive system organs also had lymphocytes that were ACE2 positive. More studies need to be done on how 2019-nCoV infects lymphocytes.Oral symptoms are rare in COVID-19. But, an oral route of infection cannot be dismissed. In another study, 4 out of 62 stool specimens of patients with COVID-19 tested positive for 2019-nCoV. Thus, an oral-fecal transmission route for 2019-nCoV is possible.Histology studies are still needed to elaborate on these findings. The results further inform how COVID-19 can be prevented.
Abstract|The theory of historical contingency is that repeated occurrences of an evolutionary event result in dramatically different outcomes. This theory was tested on the same four types of anolis species (ecomorphs) on four different islands in the Greater Antilles. The similar morphologies and niches of the lizards among the islands can be explained by one of two hypotheses: all ecomorphs originated from a common ancestor on one island and then dispersed to different islands, or that there was independent evolution of each set of ecomorphs on each island. The researchers found the latter to be true, indicating that adaptive radiation is a stronger driving force than historical contingency in producing evolutionary outcomes across islands.
Abstract|The authors assessed six (randomized, double-blind, and controlled) phase 2 trials of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for PTSD. These were conducted from April 2004 to February 2017 and warrant phase 3 trials. The experimental groups received 75-125 mg of MDMA, and the control groups received 0-40 mg of a placebo (a harmless pill) in two or three 8-hour therapy sessions spaced a month apart. Three, 90-minute drug-free sessions came before the first drug-exposed session, and after subsequent drug-exposed sessions. After two MDMA-assisted sessions, (1) there was a significant decrease in PTSD symptoms in the MDMA-group and (2) 54.2 of the MDMA-group (compared to 22.6 in the placebo group) recovered enough to no longer qualify for CAPS-IV PTSD. Symptoms of depression also improved in the MDMA-group. Thus, MDMA-assisted psychotherapy is well-tolerated (little side effects), effective, and promising for phase 3 trials.
Introduction|PTSD has an estimated lifetime prevalence of about 4 worldwide and over 8 in the U.S. It has extremely impairing symptoms such as intrusive thoughts and flashbacks that can lead to further complications later in life (i.e., hypertension). Psychotherapies like trauma-focused CBT are effective for many PTSD patients but are inaccessible for a sizable population. Medications for PTSD have largely proven ineffective and may come along with poor side effects. Moreover, only two drugs- sertraline and paroxetine- are FDA approved, so it is important for new and effective drugs to be developed.The combination of psychotherapy with MDMA is a promising approach to PTSD. MDMA may assist therapy by facilitating communication and connection between the therapist and client. Recreational use of MDMA in the 1980s led to the drug becoming classified as a Schedule I drug by the FDA. This made using MDMA for therapy illegal. However, after clinical trials conducted from 2004-2017 regarding the therapeutic benefits of MDMA were evaluated by the FDA, MDMA psychotherapy was granted two phase 3 trials.
Methods|ParticipantsParticipants had chronic PTSD lasting over 6 months according to the Clinican-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-IV (CAPS-IV) and had an inadequate response to at least one psychotherapy and/or medication (for PTSD).Protocols and treatmentsAt a 1:2 ratio, participants were randomized to receive a placebo/control or active doses of MDMA (75mg, 100mg, 125mg) respectively. During the 8-hour experimental sessions, participants were invited to introspect and revisit traumatic experiences. They then slept overnight at the site and had a 90-minute integration session with the therapist discussing thoughts and feelings during the experimental session. Optional supplemental doses of MDMA (half the first dose) were offered 1.5-2.5 hours after the initial dose in the experimental sessions.AssessmentsAssessments for CAPS-IV scores (primary outcome), symptoms of depression (secondary outcome), and meeting diagnostic criteria for PTSD (secondary outcome) were done at baseline (before any sessions) and at follow-up visits 1-2 months after the second or third session.Statistical analysisEfficacy of treatments was evaluated with a mixed-effect repeated measure model on change in CAPS-IV scores from baseline to post second and third treatment session.
Results|The average duration of PTSD was 215.3 months. 90.9 (179/197) of participants took the optional additional dose. 7.6 (8/105) of participants dropped out of the study.The active group has average CAPS-IV score drops of 30.4 compared to the control groups 10.5. The effect of the MDMA treatment was large and statistically significant.After 1-2 months of experimental sessions. 54.2 of the active group, compared to 22.6 of the control group, no longer met diagnostic criteria for PTSD. There were greater improvements in symptoms of depression in the active group than the control group.Commonly (and expectedly) reported treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) during the experimental sessions included psychiatric, gastrointestinal, and general disorders. Over 40 of participants in either group reported anxiety, dizziness, fatigue, headache, and nausea on the day of the experimental sessions. These symptoms were mild and decreased in frequency over the 7 days after the sessions. Suicidal thoughts increased and were more common in the MDMA group.
Discussion|The efficacy and tolerability of this MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for PTSD among participants with different forms of trauma make the therapy generalizable. Side effects were mild and tapered off after experimental sessions, making MDMA a safe drug for therapeutic treatments. The most effective dosage (and those tailored to body weight) is not known and will be assessed in phase 3 trials. MDMA was not shown to impair cognition so neurocognitive measurements will not be taken during phase 3 trials. MDMA use in the context of trauma psychotherapy had a low potential for abuse as there were no reports of MDMA use outside of the study, and no treatments were discontinued from MDMA “cravings”.
Limitations|Participants and therapists were mostly white/caucasian, so the generalizability of results to other ethnicities will be explored in phase 3 trials. Differences in study design and an inability to control for between-group comparisons are some drawbacks of pooled data analyses. 
Abstract|The drug BI-RG-587 inhibits HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. It is noncompetitive with respect to dGTP. BI-RG-587 inhibited HIV-1 replication in vitro. BI-RG-587 showed little cytotoxic effects until very high concentrations in culture.
Abstract|The jellyfish Aequorea victoria expresses green fluorescent protein (GFP). A complementary DNA can be expressed in prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells. Other substrates or cofactors are not necessary for this fluorescence. Thus, GFP can be used to monitor gene expression and protein localization in living organisms.
Abstract|Whether hydroxychloroquine can prevent infection after exposure to SARS-CoV-2 is unknown. In this study, the researchers conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in the U.S. and Canada. They tested hydroxychloroquine’s ability to prevent infection after exposure to SARS-CoV-2. Participants in the study were adults who had exposure to someone with COVID-19 at a distance of less than 6 feet for more than 10 minutes with little protection. After exposure, participants received a placebo or hydroxychloroquine. The researchers assessed whether the participants developed laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 or illness that indicated COVID-19 within 14 days. The researchers found that the incidence of COVID-19 did not differ significantly between participants receiving hydroxychloroquine and participants receiving placebo. Side effects were also more common with hydroxychloroquine than placebo. In conclusion, hydroxychloroquine did not prevent COVID-19 after exposure.
Methods|The researchers conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. They randomly assigned participants to receive either hydroxychloroquine or placebo. Participants had known exposure to SARS-CoV-2.The researchers included participants who had household or occupational exposure to a person with confirmed COVID-19 at a distance of less than 6 feet for more than 10 minutes with little protection (no face mask, or face mask but no eye shield).Recruitment of participants was done by social media outreach and other media platforms.Hydroxychloroquine sulfate or placebo was dispensed and delivered to participants. The dosing for hydroxychloroquine was 800mg once, then 600mg 6-8 hours later, and 600mg daily for 4 more days. Placebo tablets were similar in appearance to hydroxychloroquine tablets and were prescribed in an identical manner.The primary outcome studied was laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 or COVID-19-related symptoms if testing was unavailable. Secondary outcomes included hospitalization for COVID-19 or death, PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, discontinuation of medication, and severity of symptoms. Data about side effects were also collected.Statistics were used to calculate ideal sample size and assess the incidence of COVID-19 disease.
Results|In this study, the researchers investigated the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine in preventing symptomatic infection of SARS-CoV-2.The researchers’ approach using internet-based self-referral and online follow-up surveys allowed recruitment across the U.S and Canada, indicating broad geographic participation and high generalizability to the general population. It also minimized risk of infection to researchers and lowered the burden of research participation. A result of this approach was that participants were generally younger and healthier than those more at-risk for severe COVID-19.In addition, while PCR or serologic testing for asymptomatic infection would have strengthened the study, it was not possible. Thus, more research should be done to investigate the effect of hydroxychloroquine on mild or asymptomatic infections. However, the risks associated with hydroxychloroquine may increase in more at-risk populations and could negate any benefits.The researchers acknowledge that this trial has limitations. Reproduction of the researchers’ results in other, ongoing trials is necessary to confirm their findings.
Abstract|Before the pandemic started one out of every five college students experienced a diagnosable mental disorder worldwide. As the pandemic creates novel issues for college students it is important to explore methods to help alleviate this future and current mental strain. This article gives suggestions on how educational institutions and professionals can address this rise in mental health challenges.
1. The impact of COVID-19 on collegiate mental health|The sudden closure of campus has resulted in isolation, frustration, loneliness, and has resulted in college students not receiving their proper therapy. This functions to amplify their psychological issues which increases suicide and substance abuse risk. The sudden closure of school resulted in worse mental health due to the routine of college life being disrupted. Similarly many students research projects and internships have been cancelled or delayed potentially indefinitely. This prevents their further academic achievements, delays graduation, and reduces competitiveness in the future job market. The sudden closure has forced many students to return back home causing more tension. Especially as students must worry about transmission of the virus to their family and elderly family members. Finally, a majority of students have lost their jobs which results in financial anxiety. This COVID-19 pandemic greatly influences students' mental health and thus calls for concern from educational institutions to support them during this trying time.
3. Recommendations|The transition to telecommunication is advised however faculty should consider offering virtual office hours. This will allow them to process the implications of the pandemic on their academic careers. Research advisors and internship managers should take an active role in reaching out to the affected students and working to figure out alternative options to maximize their potential experience in the program. Finally, universities need to work on novel methods to support students in their capstones and research projects so that students can achieve their graduation requirements.University counseling should set up telemental health counseling as it has been found to be effective in treating anxiety and depressive symptoms. They should also encourage students to reach out to support groups appropriate to the individual student and develop public health messaging to students and encourage them to take action for the safety of their own mental health.
4. Conclusion|It is vital that universities give students the option and encourage them to take their mental health into their own hands. To provide them resources, coping strategies, and psychological resilience. Universities are in a fantastic position to help college students stay well in both mind and body during this pandemic and their action is required. 
Abstract|Many filament-like cyanobacteria have a repeating growth pattern of single heterocysts, or cells that specialize in nitrogen fixation, separated by 10 somatic cells. It was discovered that overexpressing a gene, patS, blocked the normal development of heterocysts. When patS was mutated to completely lose its function, there was an increased frequency of heterocysts and an abnormal pattern. When GFP was used as a reporter gene for patS (reporter gene fusion), fluorescence was strongest in somatic cells that were developing into heterocysts. Moreover, adding a synthetic peptide containing only the last five amino acids of PatS was sufficient to inhibit heterocyst development. PatS appears to control heterocyst pattern formation through intercellular signaling.BackgroundCell-cell communication plays a key role in controlling the development of different cells. Diazotrophs are cyanobacteria that do their own nitrogen fixation. Nitrogenase, or the enzyme that breaks down nitrogen, loses its function when oxidized. However, many cyanobacteria produce energy from photosynthesis, from which oxygen is a byproduct. In diazotrophs, approximately every tenth somatic cell differentiates into a heterocyst, which effectively separates the two processes of photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation. PatS is a gene that mediates heterocyst expression. This experiment is done to effectively determine the effects of manipulating patS on heterocyst formation and pattern.
Abstract|The main focus of this paper is on retrogenes and transposons. Transposons are pieces of genetic material that can reinsert themselves back into the genome. Retrogenes are genes that can be created when these transposons are reinserted. While most retrogenes can cause detrimental mutations, there are a small number of retrogenes that can actually create functioning proteins. In this study, chondrodysplasia, a disease that causes some breeds of dogs to have shorter legs, is linked to a retrogene that encodes a growth factor, fgf4. This demonstrates how a single retrogene can drastically affect evolutionary development in the domestic dog.
Methods|	The Wuhan Jin Yin-tan hospital was used as the data source for this study, as it was a designated treatment center for SARS-CoV-2 in the region. 52 critically ill patients (deemed “critical” based on ICU admission, need for mechanical ventilation, or low inspired oxygen levels) admitted between Dec 24, 2019 and Jan 26, 2020 were observed.	Age, sex, exposure history, chronic illness history, lab data, and various in-hospital symptoms (cough, fever, headache, chest pain…) were all collected and evaluated. Certain details such as ventilator settings could not be recorded due to the emergency nature of some provisional ICU’s. Primary outcome was 28-day mortality following a patient’s ICU admission, secondary outcomes were incidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS, fluid build up in alveoli) and the need for mechanical ventilation.	Mean age of patients was 59.7, with 67 being men. 33 of patients had known exposure to the Huanan seafood market and 40 had known chronic illnesses.	
Challenges in treating COVID-19| Coronavirus was first discovered in December 2019. The largest issue will be the rapid increase in critically ill patients. As of March 16th, there is no vaccine or drug available and current provisions focus on supportive care: oxygenation, ventilation, and fluid management. Currently, herbal treatments, anti-malarial, and anti-viral medications show potential promise as an effective treatment.
Convalescent plasma: one of the forgotten immunologically based strategies| Using plasma from recovered patients showed to cause a significant reduction in mortality and viral load. This was demonstrated with SARS-CoV and MERS-COV. No adverse side effects were noted. This therapy requires more research. New studies from China National Biotec Group Co have claimed similar reductions in viral load, inflammation, and symptoms after infusion of plasma.
Conclusion| No treatment plans are in place as of yet. It is too soon to see what will prove to have efficacy, but some preliminary results show promise, specifically the use of serum from recovered COVID-19 patients.
Abstract| Remdesivir is a nucleoside analog. Which means that its chemical structure imitates the chemical structure of a nucleotide. Nucleotides are how we store and transmit genetic information. SARS-CoV-2 uses this genetic language as well. To test Remdesivir it was given on a compassionate-use basis to patients hospitalized with confirmed COVID-19. A 9 day trial was conducted and the clinic data was collected for a one month period. This trial included severe cases of COVID-19 infection and compassionate-use of Remdesivir showed clinical improvements in 36 of the 53 patients (68). Measurement of its efficacy requires future randomized, placebo controlled trials. 
Abstract|The virus that originated in China, SARS-CoV-2, that led to Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) at the end of 2019 has spread to 28 countries/regions infecting a confirmed 43,000 people. The virus is spread between humans through direct contact or through droplets. The incubation period is 6.4 days and has a reproduction number of 2.24-3.58 (i.e. it is expected that one case will give rise to 2.24-3.58 cases). The most common symptoms of COVID-19 are fever followed by cough. The drug remdesivir showed promising results in a COVID-19 patient in the USA and is now undergoing clinical trials in China.
Abstract|This article introduces a novel unobtrusive wearable device that measures electrodermal activity (EDA) for health related systems. EDA measures the changes in conductivity in the skin because of increases or decreases in sweat gland activity. This device is placed on the wrist and continuously monitors if the user is in a calm or distress condition. The results indicate 89 accuracy when using only data from the EDA signal.
1. Introduction|The detection of stress can prevent many health issues related to distress. This warrants the need for a device to monitor and interpret a person's arousal state which would be beneficial for maintaining a person's emotional well being. EDA is directly related to the sympathetic nervous system, which works to cause arousal. Similarly, EDA sensors are cheap, small, and light weight which make it a prime candidate for implementation into a wearable. The best place for EDA sensors is the palms of hands or soles of the feet.
4. Methodology|Participants sit in front of a monitor with the wearable placed onto the wrist on the non-dominant hand. 10 neutral or emotionally charged images were shown in series to participants for 6 seconds with 1 second black screens in between. Before switching from emotional to non-emotional images, a 10 second black screen was shown to bring the participants to a neutral emotional state.
5. Results|Higher values of skin conductivity measured from EDA are observed during distress.
6. Conclusions|Other systems that measure stress use a variety of other physiological and camera sensors to reach an accuracy of 68. These systems achieve a worse outcome with more sensors. The researchers method uses only the measurement of EDA and is notable due to its small hardware size, signal processing capability, and software accuracy. However, this study is limited in several ways. There were only45 participants all of which were young, which reduces generalizability. Similarly, showing images within the same emotional category in series may affect the outcomes and could suppose an experimental bias. Finally, no other stimulus besides images was tested.
Abstract|Yilong et al. have developed a method to classify the variation of segments of the genome due to rearrangement of different segments. Method is based on sequencing data sourced from the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) consortium, comprising of 2,658 whole genome cancer samples across 38 tumour types. Sixteen signatures of structural variation have been identified. Deletions and translocation of genome segments occur with characteristic lengths and locations. A variety of genomic rearrangement processes contribute to the characteristic configurations found in cancer whole genome samples that can be influenced by further selection across successive generations.
Discussion|Patterns and signatures of structural variation of whole genome sequences from the PCAWG study have been described that include known variants. Both simple and complex events have been categorically described. A range of mutational processes contribute in variable combinations and intensities that lead to the observed signatures of structural variants. Experimental studies showed correlation between the range of processes and specific mutations, such as tandem duplications in BRCA1 deficiency (associated with breast cancer) and insertions in the absence of DNA replication helicase enzymes.
Methods|Whole genome sequences from 2,658 cancers of 38 tumour types were aligned to the human genome (reference hs37d5). Pipelines deconstructed genome sequences into catalogs of structural variants according to the proposed variant classification method.
Abstract|Recent news indicates that Dexamethasone may reduce mortality of severe COVID-19 patients only. COVID-19 infection has been shown to cause multi organ disease caused by autoimmune degradation of the lungs. This lung damage is caused by uncontrolled release of proinflammatory cytokines. In order for the body to best the infection, a coordinated attack from T and B cells is required. However, Dexamethasone is an immunosuppressant that would limit the damage from inflammation but inhibit the protective effect from B and T cells. It would prevent them from making antibodies and potentially lead to a greater viral load. Similarly, it inhibits the activity of macrophages. This drug may be helpful temporarily for severe patients, but continued use in recovery could inhibit the production of antibodies and be dangerous.
Abstract|Many undocumented immigrants with children are detained and deported in the United States. Their children are often overlooked in discussions about immigration and law enforcement. U.S-born children of undocumented parents, or citizen-children, are at risk for adverse psychological outcomes when their families are broken apart by detention and deportation. In this study, the researchers compared the psychological status of three categories of citizen-children: (1) those living in Mexico with their deported parents, (2) those in the U.S whose parents were detained or deported, and (3) those whose undocumented parents were not detained or deported, who served as a control group. The researchers compared these categories on measures of behavioral adjustment, depression, anxiety, and self-concept. They found all groups had elevated levels of distress, and differences between children whose parents experienced detention or deportation and those who did not. These findings are important for citizen-children’s clinical needs, and also for future research and immigration policy.
Abstract|The ICGC/TCGA Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes Consortium has systematically documented the variation in whole genomes associated with cancer across 38 tumour types and 2,658 whole cancer genomes. Most cancer genomes will experience 4 to 5 driver mutations in the whole genome. About 5 of cancer genomes do not have any identified driver mutations, which suggests that research towards cancer driver mutations is incomplete. Both common and rare variants of mutations, such as point mutations, structural variations, and clustering of mutations in the event of chromothripsis, describe the nature of cancer progression in humans.
Conclusions and future perspectives|The PCAWG study systematically quantifies the characteristic profiles of cancer mutations across 2,658 whole cancer genomes and 38 cancer types. The database of knowledge poses the potential to bridge cancer genomics and meaningful clinical outcomes with further research.
Methods|Subsets of driver mutations were identified that have high confidence on the basis of current literature knowledge through a rank-and-cut approach. A threshold was developed that assigned mutations with the highest driver ranking as the most probable driver mutations. The BWA-MEM algorithm was used to align each sample to the human reference build hs37d5. Three pipelines were used to identify mutations: Sanger, EMBL/DKFZ, and Broad. Within these pipelines, call-set benchmarking, merging, variant genotyping and statistical phasing methods were used to identify mutations. 
Abstract|Patients with chronic skin diseases and scarring were treated with CBD ointment to test if CBD is effective against these issues. CBD improved the condition of the skin, and can be used safely to treat those with chronic skin conditions
Abstract|In this study, the researchers wanted to understand the relationship between race, trends in the safety and quality of obstetric services, and trends in maternal and neonatal mortality. They calculated indicators of hospital quality and patient safety as well as maternal and neonatal mortality by race using data from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample from 2000 to 2009. They explored differences between black and white women for these factors, adjusted for age, comorbidities, and geographic region.The study found that changes in the quality and safety of obstetric services differed by region but changes over time were constant for both white and black women. Cesarean deliveries (C-sections) increased for both black and white women, but more rapidly for white women. Indicators of obstetric safety improved for both black and white women, while neonatal injuries decreased. Even though these factors improved, maternal and neonatal mortality remained constant during the study period, with black women having higher rates for both than white women.In conclusion, improvements in obstetric quality and safety do not correlate with improvements in maternal and neonatal mortality. They do not explain racial disparities for pregnancy outcomes in black and white women. More research about quality measures related to pregnancy outcomes are necessary to fully understand these disparities.
Abstract|Previous studies have shown that black people have lower triage acuity scores (TAS), which determine how urgent a patient’s condition is in emergency departments (EDs), than white people. However, these studies did not determine whether this was due to bias of triagers or proper triage according to the severity of patients’ conditions. In this study, the researchers wanted to determine if black people are assigned lower TAS even after adjusting for demographic and clinical differences. They also wanted to understand if lower TAS caused longer wait times in EDs. The researchers analyzed data from an ED electronic medical record system, including demographic and clinical information, TAS, and ED waiting times. Triage scores were assigned from 1-5, with 1 being the most urgent. TAS and wait times were compared by race after adjusting for age, gender, insurance status, time of day, day of week, comorbidities, and abnormal vital signs. The researchers found that black people had an average TAS of 2.97, compared to 2.81 for white people, which was a significantly lower acuity rating. Black people also had longer wait times compared to white people. The results of this study show that racial bias may influence the triage process.
Abstract|Black people with diabetes have worse health outcomes and diabetes management compared to white people. In this study, the researchers wanted to understand if there were certain risk factors for poor diabetes control/outcomes that were more prevalent in black people than white people. The researchers used a case-control study and enrolled 764 black and white patients with diabetes who received care. Cases in the study had poor control over at least two of these three outcomes: HbA1c levels, systolic blood pressure, and cholesterol. Controls were patients with good control over all three. The researchers investigated the following risk factors: depression, low health literacy, poor medication adherence, patients’ capacity to reduce their own cardiovascular risk, and poor communication between patients and their healthcare provider. The researchers found that for black people and not white people, depression and poor medication adherence were associated with a greater chance that they would be labeled as a “case” rather than a “control.” This means that depression and poor medication adherence are risk factors for poor diabetes control in black patients. These risk factors may be important targets to address racial disparities in diabetes control and management.
Abstract|The ability of light to pass through an electrode (optical transparency) and the ability of an electrode to carry a current (electrical conductivity) are necessary for technology like solar powered generators, lights, and touch screens. Usually, the electrodes have to be unfavorably less transparent than the structures they are built on, so the relative transmittance is less than 100. This study used a dielectric-metal-dielectric-based electrode with a higher transparency than what is previously used, which allows the relative transmittance to equal about 100.
Introduction|Indium tin oxide (ITO) is usually used as the go to transparent electrode because it has a high transmittance and electrical conductivity. But ITO has plenty of disadvantages like the low level of indium on Earth and the low flexibility of the compound. To find a better alternative to ITO, scientists are considering clear electrodes with metal networks instead. These clear electrodes have the benefits of ITO, but have downsides like shorting out and looking hazy. The most recent solution uses dielectric-metal-dielectric (DMD) transparent electrodes. In this case, thin metal film is placed between two layers of antireflection devices, called dielectrics. Dielectric 1 simply refers to the dielectric on the top of the structure, and dielectric 2 refers to the dielectric under the metal film. Together, dielectric 1 and 2 sandwich the metal, and the substrate (usually PET) is on the bottom of the whole structure. This version has all of the benefits of the other materials previously used. To get an ideal conductivity, the entire electrode system has to be more transparent than the structure it is built on.This study aims to see how close they could get the transmittance while maintaining a functioning conductivity. They used a DMD-based transparent electrode on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) as the substrate to achieve a relative transmittance of greater than 100, which could potentially replace ITO.
Results|Strategy to achieve relative transmittance surpassing 100The relative transmittance was optimized by using seven different factors. The high number of factors can make it difficult to develop the best electrode system design. This study aims to maximize two of the factors: optical transmittance and electrical conductivity. Silver, copper, and gold are all considered as metallic layers, but silver has the lowest absorption so it is the material used. Complex vector addition and algebraic manipulation of variables are used to determine the maximum thickness and maximum speed that light travels through the material (called the refractive index).Proof of ConceptThough most other studies have used the same material for both of their dielectric components in the DMD, the math done in this study suggests that two different dielectric materials may actually be the most successful design. PET is always used as the optical substrate. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is used as the dielectrics. The ideal structure to obtain a relative transmittance of over 100 as described in the study is: PET substrate/24nm TiO2/9nm Ag/63nm. Later, we will see that different materials are used for dielectric 1 and dielectric 2 with favorable results.Experimental DemonstrationsUsing thin silver films can lead to high transparency, but this can cause the issue of large surface roughness. Large surface roughness can decrease the electrical and optical function of the DMD electrode. This study demonstrates that the roughness can be reduced by using impure silver, that means adding copper (Cu) or another metal in small amounts to make the silver sample impure. This is called Cu-doped silver. Cu-doped silver was used with PET as the substrate, zinc oxide (ZnO) as dielectric 1, and aluminium oxide (Al2O3) as dielectric 2. This highly optimized model was the first study to obtain over 100 transmittance for a DMD electrode. With more optimization, the transmittance could reach even higher levels, and the DMD electrode could be used in a variety of settings, like high temperature and humidity conditions.
Discussion|Using a Cu-doped silver film in a DMD electrode can provide a thick, smooth, low optical loss, and highly electrically conductive system. The DMD electrode provides 88.4 absolute transmittance compared to the PET substrate, which has an absolute transmittance of 88.1. The DMD electrode offers an alternative to the ITO electrodes, and offers a relative transmittance of over 100.
Methods|Strategy to achieve relative transmittance surpassing 100The relative transmittance was optimized by using seven different factors. The high number of factors can make it difficult to develop the best electrode system design. This study aims to maximize two of the factors: optical transmittance and electrical conductivity. Silver, copper, and gold are all considered as metallic layers, but silver has the lowest absorption so it is the material used. Complex vector addition and algebraic manipulation of variables are used to determine the maximum thickness and maximum speed that light travels through the material (called the refractive index).Proof of ConceptThough most other studies have used the same material for both of their dielectric components in the DMD, the math done in this study suggests that two different dielectric materials may actually be the most successful design. PET is always used as the optical substrate. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is used as the dielectrics. The ideal structure to obtain a relative transmittance of over 100 as described in the study is: PET substrate/24nm TiO2/9nm Ag/63nm. Later, we will see that different materials are used for dielectric 1 and dielectric 2 with favorable results.Experimental DemonstrationsUsing thin silver films can lead to high transparency, but this can cause the issue of large surface roughness. Large surface roughness can decrease the electrical and optical function of the DMD electrode. This study demonstrates that the roughness can be reduced by using impure silver, that means adding copper (Cu) or another metal in small amounts to make the silver sample impure. This is called Cu-doped silver. Cu-doped silver was used with PET as the substrate, zinc oxide (ZnO) as dielectric 1, and aluminium oxide (Al2O3) as dielectric 2. This highly optimized model was the first study to obtain over 100 transmittance for a DMD electrode. With more optimization, the transmittance could reach even higher levels, and the DMD electrode could be used in a variety of settings, like high temperature and humidity conditions.
Abstract|Implicit bias negatively affects doctor-patient relationships and communications. However, its effect on interactions between oncologists and their patients is unknown. In this study, the researchers examined how implicit bias influences oncology interactions. They also examined whether implicit bias in oncologists negatively affect patients confidence in and perceived difficulty of suggested cancer treatments. 18 non-black physicians and 112 black patients participated. Oncologists completed a implicit racial bias test weeks before treatment discussions with new patients, which were recorded. People watched the recordings and rated oncologist communication and the length of discussion between patients and oncologists. After their discussion, patients were asked questions about patient-centeredness, how well they remembered their discussion, distress, trust, and perceptions of recommended treatments. The researchers found that oncologists with more implicit bias had shorter interactions with patients, who rated oncologist communication as less patient-centered and less supportive. More implicit bias was also associated with patient difficulty of remembering the discussion, less patient confidence in recommended treatments, and greater perceived difficulty of completing recommended treatments. In conclusion, implicit bias negatively affects oncologist-patient communication and may be a source of health disparities that must be addressed in oncology.
Abstract|In this study, the researchers wanted to determine characteristics associated with the high COVID-19 incidence on Native American reservations. They examined 287 Native American Reservations and tribal homelands, which had 861 cases as of April 10th, 2020. The relationship between COVID-19 infection rate and certain community and household characteristics was examined. The researchers found that COVID-19 cases were more likely to be found on Native American Reservations with a higher proportion of households without indoor plumbing and those that were English-only. They found no relationship between COVID-19 cases and household overcrowding measures. In conclusion, the lack of indoor plumbing and access to drinkable water may be an important determinant of COVID-19 infection on Native American reservations. Access to information about COVID-19 transmission and prevention in Native American languages may also be important in reducing COVID-19 cases in these communities. Previous studies have pointed to household plumbing overcrowding, and language as being risk factors for other infectious diseases and these risk factors are still relevant for COVID-19. Investing in public health and household infrastructure in these communities are necessary to protect them from high COVID-19 incidence.
Abstract|Machine learning may be used as an alternative to traditional alignment-based approaches to identify new anti-microbial resistance (AMR) genes, especially when microbes cannot be grown in labs. In a previous study, the researchers created an algorithm that identified AMR genes using protein characteristics, called “features,” in Gram-negative bacteria using machine learning. In this study, the researchers show that this algorithm also works for Gram-positive bacteria, identifying AMR genes that cause resistance to bacitracin and vancomycin with 87-90 accuracy. The researchers present a software tool using this algorithm and machine learning approach.
Introduction|Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is when bacteria become less susceptible to antimicrobial substances. AMR in bacteria is caused by many things, such as overexpression/duplication of existing genes, mutations and/or obtaining resistance genes from neighboring bacteria. 2.8 million people a year are infected by resistant bacteria in the U.S each year, resulting in 350,000 deaths. Resistant bacteria are a threat to human health worldwide, making it important to develop efficient tools to predict AMR.AMR is traditionally predicted by aligning sequence data with reference databases. Although this is a reliable method for highly conserved AMR genes, it can also produce many false positives even when the sequence data is very different from the reference database. Machine-learning techniques may be used as an alternative solution, predicting new AMR genes from metagenomic and pan-genomic data. However, these approaches used only a small number of genetic features to predict AMR genes and were inaccurate due to lack of feature-selection to remove irrelevant and redundant features.The researchers recently created a game-theory-based feature selection approach that was applied to Gram-negative bacteria that accurately predicted AMR genes (93-99 prediction accuracy) that give bacteria resistance to acetyltransferase, B-lactamase, and dihydrofolate reductase. In this study, the researchers test this approach from their previous study with sequence data from Gram-positive bacteria. They combined the results of both studies to create “Prediction of Antimicrobial Resistance via Game Theory” (PARGT), a computer software designed to identify AMR genes in both Gram-positive and negative bacteria. The software can be used to detect bac and van resistance genes in Gram-positive bacteria and aac, bla, and dfr genes in Gram-negative bacteria.
Results|Validation of PARGTIn their previous study, the researchers considered sequences for aac, bla, and dfr for Acinetobacter, Klebsiella, Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Escherichia as sequences to train the machine learning and tested the accuracy of the machine learning with sequences from Pseudomonas, Vibrio, and Enterobacter. The machine learning algorithm was able to correctly classify aac, bla, and dfr at 93, 99, and 97 accuracy respectively.In this study, the researchers tested this algorithm for AMR genes in Gram-positive bacteria. They considered 25 and 52 AMR sequences for van and bac respectively using Clostridium and Enterococcus to train machine learning. They selected features of AMR genes based on their relevance, non-redundancy, and interdependence with other features. They tested the trained algorithm using 6 bac AMR sequences, 9 van AMR sequences, and 14 non-AMR sequences in Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Listeria.The algorithm successfully identified all 6 bac genes (true positives) but misclassified two non-AMR genes as AMR (false positives). The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for the van sequences was 100, 86, and 90 respectively.The algorithm successfully identified all 8 of 9 van genes (true positives) but misclassified two non-AMR genes as AMR (false positives). The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for the van sequences was 89, 86, and 87 respectively.The AMR sequences’ NCBI accession number, protein names, and whether they were true or false positives can be seen in Tables 1 and 2 for bac and van respectively.Performance comparison with BLASTp and Kalign toolsThe researchers compared their algorithm’s performance against traditional alignment tools, specifically BLASTp and Kalign. Although the AMR sequences could be less identical to bacterial sequences for these tools to correctly identify them, this also led to a high number of false positives in which non-AMR sequences were miscategorized as being AMR. In addition, although BLASTp and Kalign perform better when the AMR sequences and bacterial sequences have a high similarity, the researchers’ algorithm performed better at low similarities, since it identifies AMR sequences using features of AMR genes rather than direct similarity.
Discussion|In this study, the researchers developed the “Prediction of Antimicrobial Resistance via Game Theory” (PARGT) software package to identify AMR genes in both Gram-negative and positive bacteria. PARGT generates protein features automatically and performs predictions based on the sequence the user gives the software. In addition, users can update PARGT by inputting their own known AMR and non-AMR sequences to train the algorithm so it can predict with better accuracy. In their previous study, the researchers proved that PARGT could accurately predict AMR genes in Gram-negative bacteria. In this study, they proved that PARGT works in Gram-positive bacteria as well, with a prediction accuracy from 87-90. PARGT performed better for bac since more sequences were available to train it, but traditional alignment tools (BLASTp and Kalign) worked for van since there was more sequence similarity.
Methods|GTDWFE algorithm for feature collectionCandidate features were collected using a literature search. The GTDWFE algorithm selected the best features based on relevance, non-redundancy, and interdependency of other features.Machine-learning algorithmAfter identifying the best features to use, they were used to train a machine-learning model. They then selected the best model to identify bac and van datasets.Overview of PARGT softwarePARGT is an open-source software written using Python and R. PARGT uses the best features as identified by the GTDWFE algorithm to make predictions. It also allows users to add AMR and non-AMR sequences to further train the machine-learning model, which could increase PARGT’s accuracy.Architecture of PARGTUsers input a set of known AMR and non-AMR sequences as a training dataset, generating the best features for identification in bacterial sequences. The trained machine learning model is then used to predict AMR sequences. PARGT can predict aac, bla, and dfr resistance genes in Gram-negative bacteria and bac and van resistance genes for Gram-positive bacteria.DatasetsAMR sequences were collected from the Antibiotic Resistance Genes Database, and non-AMR sequences were obtained from PATRIC.Data availabilityNCBI accession numbers for proteins can be accessed at https://github.com/abu034004/PARGT.Code availabilityThe PARGT software package and user manual are available at https://github.com/abu034004/PARGT.
Abstract|The density of the interstellar medium, the matter and radiation that exists between stars in space, determines where stars form and release energy and drives how galaxies change over time. Variations in this density result from how gases move (gas motion), but the nature of this motion across space and in different galaxies is unknown. Dense gas that forms stars is most likely formed by a combination of gas instability, collision, and turbulence. However, it is still difficult to understand the precise origin of stars because gas motion is difficult to quantify across the large spatial scale. In this study, the researchers measured the gas motion of the Milky Way and NGC 4321 galaxies, from which they obtained data ranging from 10-1-103 parsecs (pc). They detected fluctuations in velocity that were the same regardless of spatial scale and galaxy environments. Statistical analyses of these fluctuations showed how gases are densified to form stars. The researchers found oscillating gas flows with wavelengths from 0.3-400pc. These flows are most likely coupled with similarly oscillating densification mechanisms that most likely form through instabilities in gravity. These results demonstrate that the density of interstellar medium is controlled by gas flows and densification mechanisms, which are independent, and exist in many orders of magnitude in spatial scale.
Methods|Environment selectionThe researchers analyzed galaxy environments that covered about four orders of magnitude, from the kiloparsec (kpc) scale to 0.1pc scales. Environments included in the study were: NGC 4321, the Milky Way Disk, G035.39-0.33, CMZ, and G0.253+0.016.Observations and dataThe researchers collected data from various surveys of the environments studied.Spectral decompositionSCOUSEPY was used to describe the spectral decomposition data for NGC 4321 and G035.39-0.33. GAUSSPY+ was used for data from the Galactic disk region.Data selection for statistical analysisSubregions from each of the five environments were chosen for analysis and can be found in Fig. 1. Three subregions on different scales but with similar structure were chosen for analysis: part of the southern spiral arm in NGC 4321, part of the CMZ gas stream, and a filament in a molecular cloud in the Galactic Disk. Two more molecular clouds in the Galactic Disk and in the Milky Way’s CMZ were also chosen.Analysis of filamentary structuresAnalyses were conducted along the crests of each subregion by applying FILFINDER in each environment to calculate ISM density, and modeled velocity using mathematical functions.