
In many animals, the skull is made of several separate bones that are loosely joined during childhood and only fuse into one piece when the animal stops growing. A genetic disease called Carpenter syndrome causes the bones of the skull to fuse early in life, stopping it from growing correctly. Carpenter syndrome is often caused by changes to the gene responsible for making a protein called RAB23.RAB23 helps move other molecules and cell components between different parts of the cell, and is therefore involved in a number of cellular processes. Previous studies suggest that RAB23 has a role in many parts of the body during development. Yet, it is unclear which cells in the skull depend on RAB23 activity and how this protein is controlled.To answer this question, Hasan et al. grew pieces of developing skull bones that had been taken from mice lacking the RAB23 protein in the laboratory. Examining these samples revealed that RAB23 is active in cells called osteoblasts that add new bone to the edge of each piece of the skull as it grows. Hasan et al. also found that RAB23 regulates two cellular signaling pathways – called the hedgehog pathway and the fibroblast growth factor pathway – that interact with one another and co-ordinate skull development.These findings show how RAB23 controls the growth and fusion of skull bones in developing animals. This could improve our understanding of the role RAB23 plays in other processes during development. It also sheds light on the mechanisms of Carpenter syndrome which may inform new approaches for treating patients.
Mobile DNA elements are pieces of genetic material that can jump from one bacterium to another, and even across species. They are often useful to their host, for example carrying genes that allow bacteria to resist antibiotics.One example of bacterial mobile DNA is the ICE<i>clc</i> element. Usually, ICE<i>clc</i> sits passively within the bacterium’s own DNA, but in a small number of cells, it takes over, hijacking its host to multiply and to get transferred to other bacteria. Cells that can pass on the elements cannot divide, and so this ability is ultimately harmful to individual bacteria. Carrying ICE<i>clc</i> can therefore be positive for a bacterium but passing it on is not in the cell’s best interest. On the other hand, mobile DNAs like ICE<i>clc</i> have evolved to be disseminated as efficiently as possible. To shed more light on this tense relationship, Carraro et al. set out to identify the molecular mechanisms ICE<i>clc</i> deploys to control its host.Experiments using mutant bacteria revealed that for ICE<i>clc</i> to successfully take over the cell, a number of proteins needed to be produced in the correct order. In particular, a protein called BisDC triggers a mechanism to make more of itself, creating a self-reinforcing ‘feedback loop’.Mathematical simulations of the feedback loop showed that it could result in two potential outcomes for the cell. In most of the ‘virtual cells’, ICE<i>clc</i> ultimately remained passive; however, in a few, ICE<i>clc</i> managed to take over its hosts. In this case, the feedback loop ensured that there was always enough BisDC to maintain ICE<i>clc</i>’s control over the cell. Further analyses suggested that this feedback mechanism is also common in many other mobile DNA elements, including some that help bacteria to resist drugs.These results are an important contribution to understand how mobile DNAs manipulate their bacterial host in order to propagate and disperse. In the future, this knowledge could help develop new strategies to combat the spread of antibiotic resistance.
Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine are closely-related drugs used for the treatment of malaria and rheumatological conditions, such as lupus. Laboratory tests have indicated that these drugs could also be used against the virus that causes COVID-19. Given the urgent need, these drugs have been fast-tracked into large-scale clinical trials, bypassing the usual stages that would provide estimates for suitable dosage. The dosage is a critical factor in a clinical trial: too low and the drug will not have an effect, too high and the side effects may counteract any potential benefits.Laboratory tests suggest that higher doses of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine are needed for treating COVID-19 compared to malaria or lupus. However, there are concerns about the high doses used in some trials, as the drugs can have lethal side effects. Indeed, chloroquine has been used extensively in suicide attempts, particularly in France.To address these concerns, Watson et al. set out to determine the highest dosage of chloroquine (and thus of hydroxychloroquine, approximately) that does not cause unacceptable side effects. First, data was analysed regarding the concentration of chloroquine in the blood of 302 patients who had intentionally overdosed on the drug, since this concentration is tightly correlated with their risk of death. Watson et al. used a statistical model to calculate the maximal chloroquine concentration in a person’s blood associated with a one per cent risk of death. This is taken to be the threshold above which any potential benefit of chloroquine treatment would be outweighed by the possibility of lethal toxicity. Watson et al. also estimated the relationship between chloroquine concentrations and changes in electrocardiogram patterns, which record the electrical activity of the heart. This makes it possible to determine whether a high dose of chloroquine has led to dangerous levels in the blood.Using a mathematical model of how chloroquine is metabolised, Watson et al. predicted that most of the trials that tested chloroquine as a treatment for COVID-19 did not reach the calculated threshold concentration. An exception was the CloroCovid-19 trial in Brazil, which was stopped early because people in the higher dosage group suffered more heart problems and died in greater numbers than those in the lower dosage group.Two large randomised trials, RECOVERY and SOLIDARITY, have shown no benefit of hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine in the treatment of COVID-19, changing clinical practice worldwide. Both of these trials used high doses resulting in higher hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine concentrations than normally observed in the treatment of malaria or rheumatological conditions. The results from Watson et al demonstrate that the lack of benefit seen in these two large clinical trials is not due to the drug dosage being too high.
In the brain, a vast number of neurons coordinate their activity to support complex cognitive processes. One of the best places to see this in action is the hippocampus, a brain structure with a key role in memory and navigation.The hippocampus shows waves of electrical activity, which represent the synchronized firing of large numbers of neurons. The hippocampus can generate multiple rhythms at once. The two main rhythms are theta and gamma. Theta waves are slow, with a frequency of about 8 Hertz. Gamma waves are faster with a frequency of up to 120 Hertz or even more.Theta waves are always present in the brains of freely moving animals, whereas gamma waves occur in brief bursts. These bursts usually correspond to a particular point on the theta wave. One burst may occur just before each peak of the theta wave, for example, whereas another burst may occur just after the peak. This separation enables individual bursts of gamma to carry different messages without them becoming mixed up. This is similar to how radio stations broadcast their signals at different carrier frequencies to avoid interference.By recording hippocampal activity in rats exploring a maze, Lopez-Madrona et al. now show that the hippocampus has not one, but three generators of theta waves. Having three sources of theta, each of which can be synchronized with gamma, provides a more versatile system for encoding and sending information. It also means that the three theta generators can vary the degree to which they coordinate their firing. This helps the brain combine or separate streams of information as required. By working together to create a single theta rhythm, for example, the three theta generators can help animals combine information stored in memory with incoming sensory input.How the coordination of theta rhythms in the hippocampus influences the activity of other brain regions involved in learning and memory remains unclear. However, uncoupling of theta and gamma waves seems to be an early sign of Alzheimer’s disease and can also be seen in the brains of people with schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders. Understanding how this process occurs could provide clues to the origin of these disorders.
It can often be difficult for an older person to understand what someone is saying, particularly in noisy environments. Exactly how and why this age-related change occurs is not clear, but it is thought that older individuals may become less able to tune in to certain features of sound.Newer tools are making it easier to study age-related changes in hearing in the brain. For example, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) can allow scientists to ‘see’ and measure how certain parts of the brain react to different features of sound. Using fMRI data, researchers can compare how younger and older people process speech. They can also track how speech processing in the brain changes with age.Now, Erb et al. show that older individuals have a harder time tuning into the rhythm of speech. In the experiments, 64 people between the ages of 18 to 78 were asked to listen to speech in a noisy setting while they underwent fMRI. The researchers then tested a computer model using the data. In the older individuals, the brain’s tuning to the timing or rhythm of speech was broader, while the younger participants were more able to finely tune into this feature of sound. The older a person was the less able their brain was to distinguish rhythms in speech, likely making it harder to understand what had been said.This hearing change likely occurs because brain cells become less specialised overtime, which can contribute to many kinds of age-related cognitive decline. This new information about why understanding speech becomes more difficult with age may help scientists develop better hearing aids that are individualised to a person’s specific needs.
Cancer is not one disease but rather a collection of disorders. As such there are many reasons why someone may develop cancer during their lifetime, including the individual’s family history, lifestyle and habits. Infections with certain viruses can also lead to cancer and human papillomaviruses are viruses that establish long-term infections that may result in cancers including cervical and anal cancer, and the most common form of cancer worldwide, non-melanoma skin cancer.The human papillomavirus, or HPV for short, is made up of DNA surrounded by a protective shell, which contains many repeats of a protein called L1. These L1 proteins stick to the surfaces of human cells, allowing the virus to get access inside, where it can replicate before spreading to new cells. The immune system responds strongly to HPV infections by releasing antibodies that latch onto L1 proteins. It was therefore not clear how HPV could establish the long-term infections and cause cancer when it was seeming being recognized by the immune system.Now, Fu et al. have used the Southern multimammate mouse, <i>Mastomys coucha</i>, as a model system for an HPV infection to uncover how papillomaviruses can avoid the immune response. This African rodent is naturally infected with a skin papillomavirus called MnPV which, like its counterpart in humans, can trigger the formation of skin warts and malignant skin tumors.Fu et al. took blood samples from animals that had been infected with the virus over a period of 76 weeks to monitor their immune response overtime. This revealed that, in the early stages of infection, the virus made longer-than-normal versions of the L1 protein. Further analysis showed that these proteins could not form the virus’s protective shell but could trigger the animals to produce antibodies against them. Fu et al. went on to show that the antibodies that recognized the longer variants of L1 protein where “non-neutralizing”, meaning that could not block the spread of the virus, which is a prerequisite for immunity. It was only after a delay of four months that the animals started making neutralizing antibodies that were directed against the shorter L1 proteins that actually makes up the virus’s protective coat.These findings suggest that virus initially uses the longer version of the L1 protein as a decoy to circumvent the attention of the immune system and provide itself with enough time to establish an infection. The findings also have implications for other studies that have sought to assess the success of an immune response during a papillomavirus infection. Specifically, the delayed production of the neutralizing antibodies means that their presence does not necessarily indicate that a patient is not already infected by a papillomavirus that in the future may cause cancer.
Tumors contain a mixture of many different types of cells, including cancer cells and non-cancer cells. The interactions between these two groups of cells affect how the cancer cells use nutrients, which, in turn, affects how fast these cells grow and divide. Furthermore, different cell types may use nutrients in diverse ways to make other molecules – known as metabolites – that the cell needs to survive.Fibroblasts are a subset of non-cancer cells that are typically found in tumors and can help them form. Separating fibroblasts from cancer cells in a tumor takes a lot longer than the chemical reactions in each cell of the tumor that produce and use up nutrients, also known as the cell’s metabolism. Therefore, measuring the levels of glucose (the sugar that is the main energy source for cells) and other metabolites in each tumor cell after separating them does not necessarily provide accurate information about the tumor cell’s metabolism. This makes it difficult to study how cancer cells and fibroblasts use nutrients differently.Lau et al. have developed a strategy to study the metabolism of cancer cells and fibroblasts in tumors. Mice with tumors in their pancreas were provided glucose that had been labelled using biochemical techniques. As expected, when the cell processed the glucose, the label was transferred into metabolites that got used up very quickly. But the label also became incorporated into larger, more stable molecules, such as proteins. Unlike the small metabolites, these larger molecules do not change in the time it takes to separate the cancer cells from the fibroblasts.Lau et al. sorted cells from whole pancreatic tumors and analyzed large, stable molecules that can incorporate the label from glucose in cancer cells and fibroblasts. The experiments showed that, in cancer cells, these molecules were more likely to have labeling patterns that are characteristic of two specific enzymes called pyruvate carboxylase and malic enzyme 1. This suggests that these enzymes are more active in cancer cells. Lau et al. also found that pancreatic cancer cells needed these two enzymes to metabolize glucose and to grow into large tumors.Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal cancers and current therapies offer limited benefit to many patients. Therefore, it is important to develop new drugs to treat this disease. Understanding how cancer cells and non-cancer cells in pancreatic tumors use nutrients differently is important for developing drugs that only target cancer cells.
Ecosystems are at their healthiest when they have a high level of biodiversity – that is, a wide variety of different species all living together. But human activity is changing the environment and putting ecosystems under pressure. One of the places this is most evident is in the communities of organisms responsible for breaking down dead plants.These organisms – called decomposers – are highly sensitive to pesticides, metals and other chemical stressors, as well as excess nutrients, such as nitrogen, released by industry and farming. Exposing decomposers to these chemicals can change both the number of individuals of each species and the number of different species that are present. In other words, these chemicals can, respectively, alter both the abundance and diversity of decomposer communities. Controlled experiments in simplified conditions suggest that these changes in biodiversity affect ecosystem health. But, it remained unclear to what extent these results applied to real-world scenarios of environmental change.To test the findings of controlled experiments, Beaumelle et al. investigated how chemical stressors and excess nutrients affect the breakdown of leaf litter – the debris of decomposing leaves that forms on top of soil. Previous studies suggest that the reduced biodiversity caused by chemicals should result in leaf litter breaking down more slowly. Whereas the loss in biodiversity caused by nutrients will increase the number of some decomposer species, causing leaf litter to break down faster or slower, depending on local conditions.Beaumelle et al. tested these predictions by gathering the results from 69 independent studies conducted across the globe. The results showed that stressors caused the diversity and abundance of decomposers to decline, which reduced the breakdown of leaf litter, as expected. But, the outcomes of excess nutrients were more varied. Low levels of excess nutrients increased the breakdown of leaf litter, but at high levels slowed down the rate leaves decomposed. Furthermore, the effect excess nutrients had on biodiversity in decomposer communities changed according to the types of organisms in the ecosystem. This suggests that variations in biodiversity can impact ecosystems differently depending on the type of environmental change.The breakdown of leaf litter plays a critical role in carbon balance, and this has knock-on effects for the Earth's climate. This work suggests that improving biodiversity is crucial to maintain the health of ecosystems, but successful strategies will have to be adjusted depending on the type of human impact (for example, chemical stressors or nutrient additions). These findings could help researchers design better approaches for boosting ecosystem health in the future.
Vaccines train the immune system to recognize a specific virus or bacterium so that the body can be better prepared against these harmful agents. To do so, many vaccines contain viral molecules called glycoproteins, which are specific to each type of virus. Glycoproteins that sit at the surface of the virus can act as ‘keys’ that recognize and unlock the cells of certain organisms, leading to viral infection.To ensure a stronger immune response, glycoproteins in vaccines are often arranged on a protein scaffold which can mimic the shape of the virus of interest and trigger a strong immune response. Many scaffolds, however, are currently made from natural proteins which cannot always display viral glycoproteins.Here, Ueda, Antanasijevic et al. developed a method that allows for the design of artificial proteins which can serve as scaffold for viral glycoproteins. This approach was tested using three viruses: influenza, HIV, and RSV – a virus responsible for bronchiolitis. The experiments showed that in each case, the relevant viral glycoproteins could attach themselves to the scaffold. These structures could then assemble themselves into vaccine particles with predicted geometrical shapes, which mimicked the virus and maximized the response from the immune system.Designing artificial scaffold for viral glycoproteins gives greater control over vaccine design, allowing scientists to manipulate the shape of vaccine particles and test the impact on the immune response. Ultimately, the approach developed by Ueda, Antanasijevic et al. could lead to vaccines that are more efficient and protective, including against viruses for which there is currently no suitable scaffold.
Autism is a condition that is usually diagnosed early in life that affects how a person communicates and socializes, and is often characterized by repetitive behaviors. One key theory of autism is that it reflects an imbalance in levels of excitation and inhibition in the brain. Excitatory signals are those that make other brain cells more likely to become active; inhibitory signals have the opposite effect. In non-autistic individuals, inhibitory activity outweighs excitatory activity. In people with autism, by contrast, an increase in excitatory activity is believed to produce an imbalance in excitation and inhibition.Most of the evidence to support this excitation-inhibition imbalance theory has come from studies of rare mutations that cause autism. Many of these mutations occur on the sex chromosomes or are influenced by androgen hormones (hormones that usually play a role on typically male traits). However, most people with autism do not possess these particular mutations. It was thus unclear whether the theory could apply to everyone with autism or, for example, whether it may better apply to specific groups of individuals based on their sex or gender. This is especially important given that about four times as many men and boys compared to women and girls are diagnosed with autism.Trakoshis, Martínez-Cañada et al. have now found a way to ask whether any imbalance in excitation and inhibition in the brain occurs differently in men and women. Using computer modeling, they identified a signal in brain scans that corresponds to an imbalance of excitation and inhibition. After showing that the technique works to identify real increases in excitation in the brain scans of mice, Trakoshis, Martínez-Cañada et al. looked for this signal, or biomarker, in brain scans of people with and without autism. All the people in the study identified with the gender that matched the sex they were assigned at birth. The results revealed differences between the men and women with autism. Men with autism showed an imbalance in excitation and inhibition in specific ‘social brain' regions including the medial prefrontal cortex, but women with autism did not. Notably, many of these brain regions are strongly affected by androgen hormones.Previous studies have found that women with autism are sometimes better at hiding or ‘camouflaging’ their difficulties when socializing or communicating than men with autism. Trakoshis, Martínez-Cañada et al. showed that the better a woman was at camouflaging her autism, the more her brain activity in this region resembled that of non-autistic women.Excitation-inhibition imbalance may thus affect specific brain regions involved in socializing and communication more in men who have autism than in women with the condition. Balanced excitation and inhibition in these brain areas may enable some women with autism to camouflage their difficulties socializing or communicating. Being able to detect imbalances in activity using standard brain imaging could be useful for clinical trials. Future studies could use this biomarker to monitor responses to drug treatments that aim to adjust the balance between excitation and inhibition.